.L-

:;;ir Wfrfi, 'f+.S-Wm*

lisw^vf
■:t , 4$r;V,' -1'
jR^Vc jvryf^'.y1

"

■ V :•''«•'•> •

:.\y.v.\

- w-V1- 'tifftj !~

'■ A'*-'''- --' •

:•; :Jv‘ -^n afet

<,

V

'

4£ti*
o ’’•t ->.

«

)IW . vm I-">T-'V-.i.

[•»)
• ;•■•'* '■* .

1

'••'<• '
‘ .'•*»•• '•*' W/.

ywr»

;
■tt.Y

$*•**{

'

*•?':«••• ,'*W;.>'■('■’/ -!'< ;■■■ -; 5 •>»•».*’,*;,f«•>

-ivy.;-

■

JmI*
.

,Vv ■r ”. ■'■• ,' ■_ ; i •!.. .«,-;■ ,^-y

.ivy yVy

.

"'V

•'•'1 '■' -<?••, *.V|V
•ift'K • . Vji’iyyy .vyi
.

•V

,,;y.

•.

• *., F:).

■ '

v :.y,j^

-

i,:,;v,y?

:

'• 1

. •■ .'• '■ ' *, ■•

.

•• .

X};4y0
.

MS

$$$ ’
>$V*»K1 _81

•>'• '!&£¥■ f,!*v
- «'•*•/*'VW'

• • V ■•
•' ,'**■•
-V-V,>
•>Sr•» '• • \>*•'•.':• .*.*>'<i-*»,lOf-• A• -*'•• *V>te
*' ' f“
>•:» v /.',
*»v.,.:«•».«■;,
',A.; ; /
'■• • ' •*.».x >' -V/i ;«, • r >.,
i ' <w) •■■'
:;,■■■'■:■.[
,. \- .. •■•• »■•
:■• '* i.v
(

■

r,

v' ••’*• ’'••> ' ■ • •'•

i&Wii <t s -• :.•, i.tWft
• '•’./*'-.. • '•
y>',

> ■.. ' ,i') '• .li* *. (.> • '. v:.v-» *'«/.;

as
1 V y .w ..yjti:. >. ■ ■ ■
...iy.it1.•

.., litywWitfj,

v-.'SV

■■ .-'-.y 'i
iVaw,'

M
1W

"< '■• —

■

w
mm

.
<%taip!jrt!

) '■.

....

C W'm.-V.Vy.

•

-. . rv:«v--? •: \t

• .' h •(

fchfcf^r.
fjay
••-•-■’'

*'*•+*',
1

•

.’•ft-l'-' -:

M?y.'JV*• ^.'vv;•
. -

• v;;.

' ‘ Vv

mm

<•'•>

■

*.wfvi-W^^V'■••■''• :v

wit* ^»,.^.f>Ir"'-‘..Vl^KWr* U «**•'<

Mg*W ‘if

v, *.ar.

•; M-fT-V

4 <£>*«*•>•' .

>■•*’■ ;••'•--?<**•••' ■ ;>•%....•• v .■

•

'

.

-

,'Y.-<

•

••.•<•

i

:.

>.

i‘r*Y*V*WvMj} '•»'v.v >Vm'Av-v t.,.
•
l

• ■•; -

V

-■••••

mn
‘■PHnSi
;/.,s.. ,;.:.i«,;j,-.v.'' v.: A ■ • - ,.
■

...„,

-

WAPW^'t-j-

'dS

-V.
•, V'i;{ > vi.'.: v;
wsc'/fliV• w^v-r% ’•.»•• ■■•■•;.
- ''■ ■
,• : .* • '■
■ ■
\ •.
..
V
.-, -■ *
....vV
®s
i-o/.V-i-Av'
A
•‘ .>w-v*
;•..."

~ >}

#8

’■’':' ■

’’ v:

'■>■{ 1
V
>■!'iffi/rfWWV'h'i','}■ •' •■ *
-4'. ■■"•' ■
11
1 },.*.■! I\
..■■<■.•■.w.il;-.\
* V

■r.j'.• ..*•
>:'•■•' H^Kv*
'H *.-•

'•

-V'.S.O
I.v . :' ', i - •

A,)!;. :V.

‘

;V-.I- „
'.- »•' ■ V.
}/•'":-A

>

:!;■«; ■■A- -v.i*;
-.1-.!

......

I:

;!V!-^rt.iA;;

-'v■►,>‘,;-1

'••;vyi»*Vf:.v

7

>■

v:- •>>-•““

’ -v<,

-

fy&btjvk'*#*;.*'4W't*-1

1,.UM j/ ,,/ /

••

.♦•
•

f -•■

j • \!

-

■:■>.

: .'/• i
tv
-;yV a . ,’••

5®^'

-

;•

,i\
W J:jr,r ;:‘-r-1

yv-r .■.

'-v:lv vv-?.
;^y.,vj-

■’-1

dim

*•

1

>

•

1

.^

-

~i

• ft
-Ay’:W-v.,J*
H^r,’*Vrr,‘>V-• V;Vvi•• ?•/.
v
j /,*V'-v^. . > \
‘
-in .■■■. ■ ...

:::- • »•
• •

1

•Wv«. t

immjw4

-w ,i-•».*- ■
i •»' , Mk> V,•>...

**. •'»\rt

.
\.

, xb ■
••

••«>/

......
•■V
'
V v-’ifcVlOfV
„<> >r> -;VA%*'

7

'-ytiy-H-iJ-'••*,-•■
■•'/•« ■ ••>
jrfoV-V.'V.A?
<U • • Vy.t
•* >
«•»«»> r^;-r -•• -rrAimr

;•

••
j

.

.

.*i(i . » •v.'y.r**'. • ••*'».• •
V.- "
tv,'^
*>»•- •«.'•
v A, .V

• •.

f;

. !•

'••
•••. ,• • U

r^-.-x ...Vw,,. ;v-,
• ' •> , r
,...
•• • . .'u• •!-..**ft•':• • v • '•. ••» • • •• ■';•

■' •
H v- .-r
Vi.-:

•

.
» -

-

> Mt-w/iAojjv.

•p;.,■*^v>.

• •
..V »i

4

.
s\

•

•••
.-i

:■■,'.••

■■ !■

i, j. - -a

,.M,'4jk..c«.v
‘v": ,vf.‘
■ ff

■
-•-...a •>
■•■'.. "lA .« ■ I. i
-v: >!;
•■*: . 1 •'.,. ■/.;••
V 'M' *■.*;)' V

■'**'
v.k-

• -

-

.:•
..

-11

w- ...

. .. ,(•
■ ...
...
>> • >,-. v*-.'^
......-v .■
. • ■ • > .^. •>>,!#
Ai.v.-:-'.' ■

-!■*■:>'■:

...

..

v?

Vi

^*

i

W. Fitzhugh rwd Chisato O. Dubreuil

Arctic Studies Center

National Museum of Natural History
Smithsonian Institution
in association with

University of Washington Press

This publication has been prepared with the generous financial
assistance of Nippon Foundation, Japan-United States Friendship
Commission, and Japan Foundation.

/W
FfMTH

Copyright ©1999 Arctic Studies Center, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution
All rights reserved. No portion of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Ainu. Spirit of a Northern People
was produced by Perpetua Press, Los Angeles
Letitia O'Connor and Sherri Schottlaender, editors
Dana Levy, designer
Manufactured in China by Toppan Printing Company
Ainu Spirit of a Northern People is published in association with an exhibition of the same title organized by
the Arctic Studies Center, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution and circulated
by the Office of Special Exhibits of that institution between 1 April 1999 and 1 April 2001
Bibliography, Index
I. Fitzhugh, William W., 1943—

II Dubreuil, Chisato O., 1957—

III. National Museum of Natural

History (LI S.)
Library of Congress catalogue no. 99-64360
ISBN 0-96734290-2 (paperback)
ISBN 0-295-97912-7 (cloth)
The paper in this book meets the guildelines for permanence and durability of the Committee on Pro¬
duction Guidelines for Book Longevity of the Council on Library Resources

Editors' Notes
(1) Spelling

Readers may note inconsistency in the presentation of some Ainu terms, personal names,

and geographic place-names. This is because Amu language has three geographic dialects—from Hok¬
kaido, the Kuriles, and Sakhalin—and many subdialects with marked variation in terminology and pro¬
nunciation Because Ainu was a spoken and not a written language, early field workers, lacking dictio¬
naries, transcribed Ainu terms and names as best they could. We have systematized many spellings, but
in some cases terms remain as originally recorded
(2) Collection Repositories: In the interest of efficiency, the owners of materials illustrated in this book
are given in abbreviated form in the captions. A key for their translation may be found in the credits on
page 405.
(3) Authors: Contact information for Ainu and Japanese authors should be obtained from Chisato
Dubreuil; for others, from William Fitzhugh.
(4) Illustrations: Requests for reproduction rights and materials for Ainu-e illustrations should be made
directly to the institutions who own them Reproduction rights for other objects illustrated in this vol¬
ume should be obtained from owning institutions, but rental of images other than Ainu-e may be ar¬
ranged with the Arctic Studies Center.

Front Cover Illustrations A series of ikupasuy, prayer sticks, used by Ainu men to transmit
prayers to their gods during ritual ceremonies, from the Brooklyn Museum of Art (see fig.
42.10). Photograph by Susan Einstein, For other cover images (left to right) see figs. 47.15a
(Bikky Sunazawa mask), 46.2 (Ainu elder with ikupasuy and tuki), 45.12 (Ainu robe) ,41.1
(Ainu-e illustration of crane dance), p. 29 (Ainu-e chieftain), 55.2 (contemporary ritual).
Back Cover Illustration: Kamuy. Spirit of the Ainu (1998), made for the exhibition by Ainu
textile artist, Noriko Kawamura. Photograph by Don Hurlbert.

( ,.n.

Contents

Preface

•

,

Jiro Sasamura, Ainu Association of Hokkaido /7
Shigeru Kayano, Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum /7

Introduction

Ainu Ethnicity: A History /9
William W. Fitzhugh, Arctic Studies Center, Smithsonian Institution

PART I

1.

Ainu Origin Theories /29
S. A. Arutiunov, Institute of Ethnology, Moscow

2.

Ainu Homelands: Natural History from Ice Age to Modern Times /32
Yugo Ono, Hokkaido University

3.

Prehistoric Hokkaido and Ainu Origins /39
Kiyoshi Yamaura, Rikkyo University, and Hiroshi Ushiro, Historical Museum of Hokkaido

4

Ainu Ties with Ancient Cultures of Northeast Asia /47
Toshihiko Kikuchi, Hokkaido University

5.

Ancient People of the North Pacific Rim: Ainu Biological Relationships with Their Neighbors /52
Hajime Ishida, University of the Ryukyus

6

Ainu Language: Features and Relationships /57
Suzuko Tamura, Waseda University

7.

Ainu History: An Overview /67
Richard Siddle, University of Sheffield

8

Early Ainu Contacts with the Japanese /74
Isao Kikuchi, Miyagi Gakuin Women's College

9

Ainu-e: A Historical Review /79
Toshikazu Sasaki, Tokyo National Museum

Theories of
Ainu Origins

PART II
Historic
Period

10. Trading Brokers and Partners with China, Russia, and Japan /86
Shiro Sasaki, National Museum of Ethnology
1 1. Tourism, Assimilation, and Ainu Survival Today/92
Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka, National Museum of Ethnology
12. The Ainu and the Early Modern Japanese State, I 600-1 868 /96
David L. Howell, Princeton University
1 3. Foreign Contagions, Ainu Medical Culture and Conquest /102
Brett L. Walker, Yale University
14. From Assimilation to Indigenous Rights: Ainu Resistance Since 1869 /108
Richard Siddle, University of Sheffield
15. Ainu and Northwest Coast Peoples: A Comparison /I 16
Motomichi Kono, independent researcher, and William W, Fitzhugh, Smithsonian Institution
PART III
Ainu "Discovery":
Collectors, Museums,
and the Public

16. The European Image of the Ainu as Reflected in Museum Collections /125
Josef Kreiner, University of Bonn
17. The St. Petersburg Ainu Collections /132
Shinko Ogihara, Chiba University
18. Ainu Collections in North America: Documentation Projects and the Frederick Starr Collections /1 36
Yoshinobu Kotani, Nagoya University
19. Romyn Hitchcock and the Smithsonian Ainu Collection /148
Chang-su Houchins, Smithsonian Institution
20. Batchelor, Starr, and Culin: The Brooklyn Museum of Art Collection /155
Amy Poster, The Brooklyn Museum of Art
21. An Enthusiastic Quest: Hiram Hiller and Jenichiro Oyabe in Hokkaido, 1901 /162
Adria H. Katz, University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology
22. From Snowshoe to "Corn Mortars": Early Ainu Collections at the American Museum of Natural History /168
Laurel Kendall, American Museum of Natural Histoiy
23. Japanese Ainu Collections/176
Nobukatsu Aoyagi, Asahikawa City Museum, and Koji Deriha, Historical Aluseum of Hokkaido
24. The Ainu Museum Foundation/183
Shigeki Akino, The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi
25. The Ainu in Ethnographic Films /1 87
Kazuo Okada, Tokyo Cinema Shinsha

J

PART IV
Ainu Mosir:

0

(3-1 FT

e

Land, Spirits,
and Culture

26. Kamuy. Gods You Can Argue With /193
Hisakazu Fujimura, Hokkai Gakuin College
27. The Ainu Ecosystem /198
Hitoshi Watanabe, University of Tokyo
28

Foods of Choice /202
Toshihiro Kohara, Hokkaido Ainu Culture Research Center

29. Technology, Settlement and Hunting Rituals /208
Hans Dieter Olschleger, University of Bonn
30. The Ainu on Whales and Whaling /222
Masami Iwasaki-Coodman, Hokkai Gakuin College and Masahiro Nomoto, The Ainu Museum at Sbii
31

Home and Settlement: Cbise and Kotan /227
Masahiro Nomoto, The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi

32. Village Work: Seasons and Gender Roles /234
Mitsunori Keira and Tomoko Keira, Yay Yukar Park
33. Ainu Sociality/240
Emiko Ohnuki-Tierney, University of Wisconsin-Madison
34. Ainu Children's Play /246
Miyuki Muraki, The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi
35. Spirit-Sending Ceremonies /248
Shigeki Akino, The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi
36. The Archaeology of lyomante /256
Hiroshi Utagawa, University of Tokyo
37. Ainu Shamanism /261
Kan Wada, Otaru University of Commerce, edited by Igor Krupnik, Smithsonian Institution
38. Life and Death /268
Hisakazu Fujimura, Hokkai Gakuin College
39. Mythology and Animal Tales /274
Shinko Ogihara, Chiba University
40. Yukar: Epics of Heroes /278
Mie Oginaka, independent researcher
41

PART V
Even Without a
Word for Art...

To Live is to Sing /282
Kazuyuki Tanimoto, Hokkaido Ainu Culture Research Center

42. Ainu Art: The Beginnings of Tradition /287
Chisato O. Dubreuil, Smithsonian Institution
43. Saranip and Tenki. Ainu Basketry and North Pacific Affinities /301
Nelson Graburn, University of California, and Molly Lee, University of Alaska-Fairbanks
44. A Personal Rebirth through Traditional Ainu Basketry/309
Nobuko Tsuda, Ainu Association of Hokkaido
45. Clothing and Ornamentation /31 3
Mari Kodama, The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi and Hakodate City Museum
46. Ikupasuy: It's Not a Mustache Lifter! /327
Fosco Maraini, ethnologist, edited by David Dubreuil, Smithsonian Institution
47. Ainu Journey: From Tourist Art to Fine Arts /335
Chisato O. Dubreuil, Smithsonian Institution

PART VI
Ainu Present
and Future

48. Shishirimuka: A Saru River Tale / 355
Koichi Kaizawa, Farmer and Ainu Cultural Leader
49. Ainu in the International Arena /359
Kelly L. Dietz, Cornell University
50. The Ainu Shinpo: A New Beginning /366
Teruki Fsunemoto, Hokkaido University
51

Beyond the Ainu Shinpo: An Ainu View /369
Jiro Sasamura, Ainu Association of Hokkaido

52. Ainu Language: Present and Future /371
Hiroshi Nakagawa, Chiba University
53. Itaomachip. Reviving a Boat-Building and TradingTradition /374
Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka, National Museum of Ethnology
54

The Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum /377
Hideki Yoneda, Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

55. The Heart Fuchi Conveyed /379

Tomoko Keira, Yay Yukar Park

Checklist of Artifacts Illustrated in This Volume /382
List of Illustrations /389
Bibliography /393
Credits /405
Acknowledgments /407
Index/410

O

N BEHALF OF THE Ainu, the indigenous

disadvantaged due to our ethnic and social

press gratitude to the people who

background. Today, however, many Ainu have
begun to feel pride and confidence in their cul¬

have visited and will visit the exhibition.

Preface

Many Ainu have been economically

people of Japan, I would like to ex¬

We, the Ainu, have lived in the northern

tural identity. Like the Indians of North

part of the Japanese islands—from northern

America, we are trying to preserve and gain re¬

Tohoku on Honshu and Hokkaido to Sakhalin and

spect for our traditional culture and to achieve

the Kurile Islands—since ancient times. We spoke

social and economic independence.

the Ainu language, which is completely different

The purpose of this exhibition is to

from the Japanese language, and have cultivated

present excellent Ainu ethnographic collections

our own distinctive culture. In early times our an¬

from the various museums of North America.

cestors nurtured our culture through a strong re¬

The exhibition will also present the revived

spect for, and interaction with, the environment,

oceangoing itaomachip, the canoe Ainu used for

and through trading with the Chinese, Koreans,

trading, and the Ainu house, chise, which was

and Russians, the northern indigenous peoples of

the scene of many spiritual rituals, including

Asia and Alaska, and of course with the Yamato

the most important Ainu ceremony, the sacred

race (ancestors of the majority of Japanese today).

iyomante (bear-sending ceremony). Although

Although we had many disputes with the

many aspects of Ainu traditional life, ceremony,

Japanese goverment in the past, it is time to look

and spiritual culture are described, the reader

forward. Today we mainly live in Hokkaido,

should understand that this is not dead cul¬

Japan's northernmost island. While surveys con¬

ture,- contemporary Ainu art is therefore fea¬

ducted by the Hokkaido government put the

tured to demonstrate the creative strength of

Ainu population at 24,000, there are several tens

the Ainu spirit as an indicator of a "living" cul¬

of thousands of Ainu who don't claim to be Ainu

ture. We hope museum visitors and readers of

because of the fear of discrimination, or who

this volume from all over the world will enjoy

were not included in the government survey be¬

and understand the Ainu voices of the past,

cause they live in other parts of Japan.

present, and future.

JlRO S AS AM LIRA

Executive Director, Ainu Association of Hokkaido

I

WAS BORN in a country of the Ainu—Nibutani

yaykurekarapa

Village, which is the basin of the

kani anakne ainu mosir itak=an yakka Sisirmuka

Shishirimuka. I had parents whose names

petruoroke pipaus kotan

were: Arekainu (father) and Hatsume (mother). As
it happens, the exhibition will be held in the far
away country. 1 am very honored and thankful
that I will be able to send my words to the exhi¬

koapamaka p ku = ne ruwe ne. ona ku = nu wa
Arekainu unu ku=nu wa Hatsume sekor
rekorpa utar ne a ruwe ne. kunine ne wa tuyma mosir

bition. 1 also wish and pray that your exhibition

ta an marapto

will be successful, without any accidents, and

kurkasike un koytakeciw ku=ki easkay hi ramossi

will bring you to a successful conclusion.

wano ku=yairayke kor

Shigeru Kayano
Director, Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

7

m

1

1

^rar iCUEa
,•**•>

T

HE NATIVE PEOPLE OF NORTHERN JAPAN

(who also formerly inhabited the
Kurile Islands, southern Sakhalin,
and part of northern Honshu) call

Ainu
Ethnicity:
A History
William W. Fitzhugh

themselves "Ainu," meaning "people" or "hu¬
mans" in their language. Today Hokkaido re¬
mains the only homeland of the Ainu people,
most of whom live in small villages scattered
in different areas of this island. The size of the
current Ainu population lies somewhere be¬
tween 25,000 and 50,000, with the lower figure
representing the census count of those who
identify themselves as Ainu. The discrepancy

1.1 Man and Woman of Shari

reflects the feeling of many Ainu that they must

The Smithsonian's Romyn Hitchcock

conceal their ethnic identity to escape discrimi¬

was one of the first Westerners to con¬
duct ethnographic research among the
Ainu, whom he visited in 1888. In addi¬

nation and social stigma. Although this gulf of
discrimination is slowly closing, Ainu children

tion to acquiring contemporary artifacts,

continue to be harassed by their Japanese class¬

linguistic data, folklore, and historical

mates, and discrimination exists in many other

information, he conducted archaeologi¬

areas of social and professional life,- for these rea¬

cal excavations and made a photo¬

sons, throughout this century many Ainu parents

graphic record of Ainu people in the

have not revealed their ethnic identity even to

Kuriles and Hokkaido. He photographed
this elderly couple outside their home in

their children.

i.i

tion to Hokkaido. This exhibition and book

Ainu: Spirit of a Northern People is an effort to

seek to redress the lack of information by pre¬

broaden understanding about Ainu history, cul¬

senting a traveling exhibition together with an

Shari, Hokkaido. (NAA 28-380)
1.2 Blessing Ritual

ture, and contemporary life in North America

illustrated compendium on Ainu history, culture,

In the past Ainu traveled throughout

and among English-language readers. Most

arts, and modern affairs. We have been motivated

their corner of the world as traders,

people in North America and Europe today are

especially by the fact that, due to Ainu efforts

and in the modern era Ainu people
have joined other indigenous peoples
far from their homelands in northern
Japan to educate the world commu¬

ignorant of Ainu history or culture. Few of the

and political and social changes in Japan, Ainu

public visitors to the Smithsonian we surveyed

culture is beginning to experience transforma¬

about the Ainu knew anything about this culture

tion and renewal,- as it emerges from this pain¬

nity about their ancient traditions.

and its people. Those who volunteered informa¬

ful period, it heeds to be recognized for its his¬

Here, Masahiro Nomoto, David

tion mostly misidentified Ainu as American Indi¬

torical tenacity, for the beauty of its art and

Dubreuil, and Chisato Dubreuil con¬

ans or Eskimos or thought they were extinct.

literature, and for the important message that

duct a ceremony to the god of the

Most who recognize the word "Ainu" knew it

its religion and philosophy, which call for spiri¬

only as a four-letter answer to the popular cross¬

tual balance between humans and nature, bring

tree through Fuchi, the fire goddess.
They blessed with inaw and sake a
yellow cedar log Nomoto used to build
a boat for this exhibition.

word puzzle clue, "a northern native people of

to the wider world at a critical moment in human

Japan." The causes of ignorance are many,- they

history (fig 1.2).

include a lack of English-language literature, the

In 1868, a year after the United States pur¬

absence of museum presentations and exhibi¬

chased Alaska from Russia, a political upheaval

Chieftains)

tions, a paucity of Ainu scholars outside Japan,

in Japan brought to power a progressive govern¬

Hakyo Kakizaki, a member of the

and infrequent European and American visita-

ment known as the Meiji Restoration. Modern¬

< ISHU RETSUZO (PORTRAITS OF EZO

Matsumae clan that ruled Hokkaido

ization was a major goal of the new administra¬

as a fiefdom of the Tokugawa regime,

tion, and one of its first acts was to give Ezo,

began painting portraits of Ainu chief¬

Japan's large, undeveloped northern island a new

tains in 1783. The first to be com¬

name, Hokkaido. Access to Ezo had previously

pleted was a portrait of Tobu (fig. 9.6).
Kakizaki’s portraits are among the fin¬

been controlled by the Japanese Matsumae clan,

est works in the Ainu-e genre, techni¬

under charter from the Tokugawa Shogunate.

cally and artistically. The Ainu they de¬

With the Meiji Restoration, control reverted to

pict are dressed in silk robes imported

Tokyo,- foreigners were permitted entry,- and

from the Asian continent and have a

Japanese citizens were encouraged to emigrate

near-regal demeanor and attitude of

to exploit Hokkaido's natural resources. The re¬

authority. Some scholars (Takakura
1960:10) have questioned the authen¬

sulting northern land rush flooded the island

ticity of these images as accurate de¬

with newcomers and brought a new way of life

pictions of eighteenth-century Ainu

to a huge territory that until then—except for

leaders, noting that the twelve chiefs

the Matsumae enclave and a few Japanese fish¬

who are depicted had been loyal sup¬

ing stations—had been the sole province of the

porters of the Matsumae during the

native Ainu people (fig. LI). The Meiji govern¬

Ainu revolt of 1789; they surmise that

ment and most Japanese immigrants saw Ainu

the paintings and the garments the

adherence to their traditional life as an obstacle

chieftains wear were a reward for their

to progress, and policies were instituted to force

loyalty. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)
1.2

I/AINU ETHNICITY

9

contributed to marked contrasts in speech,
vocabulary, oral history, artifact styles, and
ceremonial life (as well as politics), for in addi¬
tion to regional divisions among Hokkaido
Ainu one also finds the descendants of Kurile
and Sakhalin Ainu. Despite these differences,
all Ainu living in Hokkaido are participating
1.3

in a lively cultural renaissance.

Traditional and Modern

Ainu Territories

Formerly Ainu occupied all of the islands

Like many other indigenous

in the Kurile chain, where they lived as mari¬

peoples around the world, the

time hunters and fishermen in sod-covered

Ainu lost lands, resources, and
independence to larger nations

pithouses until 1875 when the northern Kurile

that absorbed them. This map

(Chishima) islanders were resettled in Shikotan

shows changes to Ainu territo¬

(Hitchcock 1891a, Landor 1 893,• Takakura

ries between 1400 and 1945:

1955,- Siddle 1996 and this volume) after the

parts of northern Honshu were

Kuriles were obtained by Japan from Russia in

lost to Japanese expansion,

exchange for Sakhalin (fig. 1.4). Although the

while the Kurile Islands and south¬

Kurile Ainu had a small, dispersed population,

ern Sakhalin were lost to Russia.
Hokkaido, with a population of

they occupied a vast region and shifted season¬

between 25,000 and 50,000

ally between winter villages on the larger islands

Ainu, is the only remaining home¬

and summer hunting and fishing camps on the

land for Ainu people today.

smaller islands. Because the central and northern
Kuriles lacked wood, Kurile Ainu traded sea-

1.4

Villagers of Shikotan,

Kurile Islands

Kurile Islanders were successful mari¬
time hunters and traders who ranged
between Hokkaido and Kamchatka. Af¬
ter the Treaty of St. Petersburg settled

rapid Japanese colonization and "civilize" the
Ainu. Within a few years most Ainu lands, re¬
sources, and native rights had been taken away,
and in 1899 these actions were codified in a "pro¬
tection act" whose actual intent was to terminate

claims between Japan and Russia by

Ainu culture and force assimilation into Japanese

giving the Kuriles to Japan and Sakha¬

society (Siddle 1996).

lin to Russia, the northern Kurile Ainu
were resettled in the southern Kuriles,
and Sakhalin Ainu were removed to
Hokkaido. The final blow came in 1945
when the Soviet Union took the Kuriles

Meiji policies brought a harsh new reality
to Ainu life, which had already suffered three
hundred years of military defeat, territorial loss,
political and economic subjugation, and social

and expelled its remaining Ainu popula¬

discrimination at the hands of Russians and

tion as well as the returned refugees

Japanese. Nevertheless, despite these losses,

who had moved back to Sakhalin from

Ainu people and culture survived the twentieth

Hokkaido. (NAA 72-9183)

century and in 1997 were rewarded by the pas¬

mammal hides and thong, falcon feathers, and

sage of a new piece of legislation, the Ainu

other maritime products with Hokkaido and Sa¬

Shinpo, which for the first time provided posi¬

khalin Ainu and Japanese traders in exchange

tive support for Ainu culture and language.

1.4

for forest and industrial products from Japan and
Manchuria. Like the Aleuts, who inhabited the

Geography

Alaskan Island chain that now carries their name

In the nineteenth century, before Ainu territo¬

and who suffered drastic population losses at the

ries began to be absorbed by Russia and Japan,

hands of Russian traders in such maritime prod¬

Ainu mosir (the world of humans) comprised a

ucts as sea otter pelts, Kurile Ainu also lost popu¬

huge territory stretching from central Sakhalin

lation and territory to Russian and Japanese in¬

Island and the southern tip of the Kamchatka

truders intent on the lucrative sea otter trade.

Peninsula to the northern Tohoku region in

When Russia took the southern Kuriles in 1945,

northern Honshu, and the Ainu population must

the remaining Kurile Ainu were resettled in

have been considerable (fig. 1.3). Although

Eastern Hokkaido and the unique aspects of

scholars have described the Ainu as having a

their social and cultural identity were gradually

single language and culture, the Ainu before

subsumed within the Ainu traditions of north¬

1850 occupied such different ecological habitats

eastern Hokkaido.

and had such varied adaptations and linguistic
dialects (Hattori 1964,- Nakano and Kobayashi

The Sakhalin Ainu (fig. 1.5) also once
had an extensive territorial base. Early in the

1967, Kodama 1972,- Ohnuki-Tierney 1976a)

historical era they occupied much of the island

that they were essentially three distinct territo¬

of Sakhalin, but by the nineteenth century

rial subcultures or cultures. Among the Ainu

Ainu villages were found primarily in southern

living in Hokkaido today, this variation has

Sakhalin (Ohnuki-Tierney 1974, 1976a). The

INTRODUCTION / W. FITZHUCH

Sakhalin Ainu were considerably influenced by

(Fitzhugh and Crowell 1988,- see also Fitzhugh

Amur River and by the Russians (fig. 1.6). Their

and Chaussonnet 1994,- Chaussonnet 1995) ex¬

houses were log constructions,- they had greater

plored similarities and differences in the history,

access to manufactured materials from the conti¬

culture, and art of native groups living around the

nent than did Hokkaido and Kurile Ainu,- and

northern rim of the Pacific and adjacent Bering

their subsistence and spiritual beliefs, reflecting

and Chukchi Seas (fig. 1.7). Of these northern

boreal forest conditions and traditions, were

cultures, one—the Ainu—was excluded for po¬

more like those of Siberian peoples than of

litical reasons: Crossroads was organized under a

Hokkaido Ainu. In 1945 the Sakhalin Ainu were

bilateral arrangement with the Soviet Union,

forced from southern Sakhalin by the Russians

which did not want its political history involving

and were resettled in Hokkaido.
1.5

Ainu of Sakhalin

Crossroads of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and Alaska

the Manchurian-dominated cultures of the lower

The Hokkaido Ainu, whose population of

the seizure of the Kuriles and southern Sakhalin
and the expulsion of Ainu peoples aired broadly

Living near the border between Japan,

about 15,000 represented less than 7 percent of

to the public. Crossroads proceeded, but the ab¬

Russia, and Manchuria (China), Sakha¬

the total number of people, 226,200, living in

sence of the Ainu left a conspicuous gap in our
roster of North Pacific peoples.

lin Ainu have had a tumultuous history.

Hokkaido in 1888 (Hitchcock 1891b), were the

They shared Sakhalin with Nivkhi and

largest of the Ainu subgroups. Great diversity

Orok, traded with mainland Oroch and

marked the Ainu populations within this region,

omission. Our work has grown out of an eight-

Ui’ta, and used their intermediate posi¬

Ainu: Spirit of a Northern People corrects this

in part because each group responded to ex¬

year collaboration that began in 1990 with discus¬

tremely different environmental conditions, and

sions between curators in American museums

Their culture and physical type reflects

in part due to varying influences of Japan in

and a team of Japanese scholars, organized by

Siberian influence and Okhotsk heri¬

southern Hokkaido and continental influences in

Yoshinobu Kotani, who were inventorying

tage. (NAA 98-10370)

northern Hokkaido. Environmental gradients

American Ainu objects and archival documents.

1.6

here were extreme: arctic sea ice and northern sea

During this multiyear survey, which eventually

tion between the continent and the
Japanese islands to their advantage.

Sea-Lion Hunters of

Moneron Island, Sakhalin

In addition to hunting and fishing in
the interior of the islands they inhab¬
ited, Ainu hunted sea mammals until

mammals are present in winter on Hokkaido's Sea

identified more than 3,200 Ainu specimens in

of Okhotsk coast, whereas temperate ocean con¬

North America (Kotani, this volume), curators of

ditions and swordfish are found on its Pacific and

several museums holding the largest collections,

southern coasts (Nakano and Kobayashi 1967,-

including the American Museum of Natural His¬

Ohnuki-Tierney 1976a,- Ono, this volume). Their

tory, the Brooklyn Museum of Art, the University

reserve these resources for them¬

homelands in Hokkaido offered inhabitants a di¬

of Pennsylvania Museum, and the Smithsonian's

selves. Oral history suggests that

verse coastal ecology of long sandy beaches,

National Museum of Natural History, decided to

early Ainu hunted whales, seals, and

salmon rivers, and lowland and highland forests

cooperate on an exhibition that would highlight

with temperate and boreal tree species and many

these "rediscovered" Ainu collections.

such productive enterprises were pro¬
hibited by the Japanese in order to

sea lions with floats and toggling har¬
poons similar to those of Eskimo
technology. Sea-mammai products

different types of flora and fauna. By comparison

like thong (hide rope), oil, and dried

with the Kuriles and Sakhalin, Hokkaido was a

The idea of a special Ainu exhibition in
North America was an exciting prospect for

meat were valuable trade commodi¬

continent unto itself. Its proximity to Honshu,

many reasons. First, there was the beauty of

ties. Stomachs (seen drying here)

Sakhalin, and the Maritime Territory of the Amur

Ainu material culture, whose distinctive and

were often used as containers to

offered even more resources, although acquiring

unique styles incorporated elements of Japanese

store renderered fat. (NAA 98-10364)

them required delicate negotiations with power¬

and Asian Amur River traditions. Our interest

ful neighbors.

was also sparked by the fact that the North
American collections had never been viewed or

A Celebration of Ainu Culture

studied as a corpus from which to draw broader

In 1988 the National Museum of Natural History

understandings about Ainu history, culture, and

opened a special exhibition featuring the tradi¬

art. For reasons peculiar to Ainu studies in

tional cultures of the North Pacific region from

North America, none of these collections, ex¬

Vancouver Island to the Amur River and Sakhalin.

cept for the Smithsonian's, had been published

I / AINU

ETHNICITY

l i

i.7 Native Peoples of the
Greater North Pacific

Despite differences in cul¬
ture and history, peoples
and cultures of the
greater North Pacific re¬
gion have more in com¬
mon with each other than
with the cultures and
peoples of adjoining re¬
gions to the south.

scientifically and none had been used for a major

pleted a master's degree in native art history at

exhibition. Only a few of the two dozen collec¬

the University of Washington in Seattle, joined

tions unearthed by the Japanese Ainu Collection

the project. Chisato had a deep interest in Ainu

Documentation Project had ever been taken out

culture and knew many Ainu cultural leaders and

of their storage cabinets, and none, as of 1990,

artists in Japan. In addition to her background

had received conservation treatment.

and Ainu community contacts, she brought ex¬

There were other important reasons for

pertise in modern Ainu art. With her assistance

doing an Ainu show. Although European and

we were able to reconnect the museum objects

North American inventory projects had pro¬

with modern Ainu art and the living tradition of

duced new scholarly information (see edited

Ainu people today.

volumes, Kreiner 1993, 1996) and, in Europe
and Japan, three exhibitions (Kreiner and

1.8 Ainu Documentation Team
Japanese and Ainu scholars inventoried
Ainu collections in North America dur¬

In the fall of 1995 Chisato joined our
project as coordinator (later to become co-cura-

Olschleger 1987,- Ohtsuka 1993; Munro 1994),

tor) together with her husband, David Dubreuil,

North Americans knew almost nothing about

an American Indian (Mohawk/FJuron) who be¬

the Ainu. Gathering a team of Japanese and

came our project manager, fund-raiser, and advi¬

American scholars and museum curators, we

sor, and we began communicating with Ainu or¬

quickly began to see the exhibition as more than

ganizations and communities in Hokkaido and

a display of old Ainu collections and archival

discussing the project directly with Ainu artists

than 3,200 specimens. An earlier sur¬

materials,- rather, we thought it important to

and cultural leaders. As our work progressed, the

vey in Europe revealed 5,700 objects.

present the unexhibited traditional collections

advice of Ainu civic, cultural, and artistic leaders

With recent inventories in Russia, the

in the broader context of Ainu history, archaeol¬

added an important new dimension to the views

total tally outside Japan is more than

ogy, traditional ethnology, modern life, and arts

of Japanese, American, and European scholars

with an emphasis on Ainu culture as a living tra¬

on the project team, and many of them contrib¬

dition. The American team was especially inter¬

uted important chapters to this book.

ing the early 1990s, discovering more

13,000, which is about one-third the
number of Ainu specimens held by
Japanese museums. Here the team
inspects Romyn Hitchcock’s Ainu col¬

ested in having Ainu people participate in the

lection of 1888 at the Smithsonian's

curatorial work. Fortunately, Chisato Dubreuil, a

Presentation

National Museum of Natural History.

woman of Ainu ancestry who had recently com¬

Over the course of two years during which the
curatorial team inspected collections in Washing¬
ton, Philadelphia, New York, and Brooklyn, and
held seminars and workshops with Ainu experts
(fig. 1.8), the concept of ethnicity emerged as the
intellectual core of the project. In the early stages
of our work, as we pored over the beautiful but
dusty remnants of Ainu tradition in museums,
"ethnicity" seemed a fairly academic issue, but
once Chisato and David Dubreuil and the Ainu
community became involved in the process, the
living tradition of Ainu art and culture enlivened
our study and gave a broader purpose to what
had previously been an esoteric enterprise. Sud¬
denly the meaning of the objects and archival
materials was transformed from "specimen" into
"treasure," from nameless photographic images
into someone's grandmother or grandfather, and

12

INTRODUCTION / W. F1TZHUGH

ists (Aimi-e). The material is organized along two
different dimensions: informational (or thematic)
perspectives and chronological horizons. On
one hand the question "What is Ainu?" explores
Ainu ethnicity through the perspectives of an¬
thropology, geography, history, spiritualism, art,
and community life. The question "How has be¬
ing Ainu changed?" explores Ainu ethnicity as it
has evolved through a sequence of chronological
or historical "horizons" recognizable in archaeol¬
ogy, history, traditional ethnology, and contem¬
porary life. It is difficult enough to organize a
book in two dimensions, but we also ask the
reader to consider the data provided here in a
third dimension—space—because historically
the Ainu have had diverse origins and great re¬
gional variation.
Fifty-five articles organized in six sections
present an overview of the evolving Ainu tradi¬
tion, raising questions and summarizing the
current state of knowledge about each topic.
Part I (chapters 1-6) includes essays on anthro¬
pological theories about Ainu origins, historical
geography and environment, biological theo¬
ries and relationships, and linguistics. Part II
(chapters 7-15) discusses the history of Ainu
culture and its relationship with the Tokugawa
Shogunate and the Ainu's northern trading
partners as seen in historical records and Ainu-e
illustrations painted over a several-hundredyear period (fig.1.1 1). Part III (chapters 16—25)
provides a view of Ainu as they were perceived
by museum collectors and anthropologists,
who preserved Ainu material culture and pho¬
tographic images in museum collections in
Europe, Russia, North America, and Japan (fig.
1.12). Part IV (chapters 26-41) is an ethno¬
graphic outline summarizing the Ainu belief
system, including the ritual sending ceremonies
and shamanism, as well as aspects of its
1.10

lifeways—the technologies of hunting, fishing,
1.9, 1.10

AiNU Design

Ainu express their unique cultural lin¬
eage in their distinctive implements,
clothing, and art. The language of
Ainu design is understood as “Ainu"
because its motifs follow an Ainu de¬
sign grammar. Similarities in the de¬
sign system are seen in this carved
wooden platter, collected by General
Horace Capron in 1875 whife on a
U.S. development mission in Hok¬
kaido, and a detail from a retarpe
(nettle-fiber) robe. (NMNH 19415;
BMA 12.690)

the show took on a living dimension. The "un¬

and procuring food—and its forms of perfor¬

known" North American collections began to re¬

mance art (yukar [epic stories], song, and

connect with their Hokkaido past. We became

dance). Part V (chapters 42—47) is devoted to

something more than curators inquiring into a re¬

Ainu arts of the nineteenth and twentieth cen¬

mote culture and began to understand how these

turies—notably textiles, basketry, woodcarv¬

materials could contribute to the Ainu cultural

ing, and modern art. Part VI (chapters 48-55)

renewal underway in Japan.

takes up issues of contemporary social, politi¬

In time, the concept of ethnicity as it relates

cal, and cultural change,- chronicles changing

to "Ainu-ness" at different periods in history and

relations between the Ainu and the modern

from different thematic perspectives became the

Japanese state,- and includes personal state¬

organizing principle behind Ainu: Spirit of a North¬

ments by Ainu cultural leaders.

ern People. Unlike other past exhibitions that have
emphasized spiritualism or diversity, the central

The "Ainu Enigma”

theme in Ainu is the development and expression

Other than a lack of specific knowledge of the

of a culture's identity over centuries of time. The

Ainu, our informal survey of visitor attitudes

book presentation combines scholarly essays and

revealed something else about this cross-sec¬

Ainu community views illustrated by museum col¬

tion of our museum public: those visitors who

lections and informed by archival materials, in¬

knew something about the Ainu spoke about

cluding ethnographic photographs and historical

bear festivals and racial origins. Museum cura¬

illustrations of the Ainu painted by Japanese art¬

tors a century ago had been lured to Hokkaido

I / AINU ETHNICITY

13

by similar fascinations. The "Ainu enigma" had

about the Ainu's striking dress, elaborate ceremo¬

Ainu men used a prayer stick (ikupasuy)

been a popular scholarly puzzle that tantalized

nial life, and unusual physical appearance sparked

in rituals for the gods. Early observers

nineteenth-century explorers, museum collec¬

the interest of American scholars and museum

tors, and anthropologists researching the origin

directors. The long flowing beards, hirsute bod¬

and spread of human "races."

ies, large stature, deep-set eyes, facial features

L12

Prayer Stick

often referred to these sacred objects
as "mustache lifters" because the Ainu
also used them to hold up their long
mustaches when drinking sake during

Europeans have had a long history of in¬

(which most foreigners thought resembled

these rituals. This ikupasuy decorated

terest in the Ainu, beginning with Dutch and

with five flying birds was collected by

Jesuit contacts in the Dejima (Nagasaki) trade

lip tattoos worn by women made Ainu appear

Benjamin Smith Lyman, an American

entrepot in the seventeenth century and con¬

very different from other Asian populations. Al¬

tinuing with the early nineteenth-century work

though it is unclear where the idea originated, by

geologist dispatched to Hokkaido
from the University of Massa¬

Caucasoids more than Mongoloids), and striking

of Europe's premier (and first) Japanologist,

1868 Albert Bickmore, President of the American

Philipp von Siebold, whose multivolume opus,

Museum of Natural History, was in the habit of

Hokkaido's mineral re¬

Nippon, brought knowledge of Japan to the

commenting on the bearded "Aryan appearance"

sources. (NMNH 22261)

Western world for the first time (Kreiner 1993

of the Ainu, and in the decades before 1900 this

and this volume). After Commodore Matthew

idea had become a major focus of public interest

chusetts between 1871 and
1881 to help develop

1.11

Perry, with his I 854 visit, forced the Japanese to

in the Ainu (Bickmore 1868,- Baelz 1900,-

lift their exclusionary ban on foreign travel

Arutiunov, Ishida, this volume). Earlier the ro¬

within their archipelago, Europeans and Ameri¬

mantic European notion of the Ainu as the repre¬

cans began to visit Hokkaido, both as tourists

sentative of the "noble savage," more so even

and for official reasons. They discovered the na¬

than the American Indian, had captured public

tive Ainu culture in drastic decline and were

imagination. For the next four decades, most of

convinced that the Ainu would not survive more

the large natural history museums in eastern

Bringing the Bear

to Iyomante

Ainu-e, literally "Ainu illus¬
trations,” are a major
source of information
about early Ainu life and
customs. Some, dating
as early as the thirteenth
century, depict people
who can be recognized
ethnically as Ainu. Most

Ainu-e were painted in the
eighteenth and nine¬
teenth centuries, such as
this illustration from

Scenes from Ezo Island
by Teiryo Kodama show¬
ing Ainu exercising the
bear before the iyomante
ceremony. While its style
is lively and the image
depicts Ainu clothing
relatively accurately,
negative Japanese atti¬
tudes toward the Ainu

than a few decades. This view was also held by

North America sent collectors to Hokkaido to

are clearly conveyed by

the Japanese, whose official policies were di¬

gather Ainu objects, study its culture and popula¬

the use of such stylistic

rected to hasten assimilation (Hitchcock 1891b:

tion, and make photographic records of this "pe¬

features as bulging

433). The views of these visitors reflected their

culiar" people (figs. 1.13,1.14).

eyes, hirsute bodies,
and somewhat simian
features. (HML)

awareness, and sometimes their experience, of In¬
dian cultures of the American West, which were
also thought to be on the verge of extinction.

toms and beliefs. Their practice of capturing,

Among the early visitors to the Ainu was the in¬

raising, and killing bears for ceremonial pur¬

trepid Englishwoman Isabella Bird, who wrote a

poses before sending their spirits home to the

book about her 1878 experiences (Bird 1881,-

god world with gifts and prayers seemed brutal

Dubreuil, this volume). Others came during the

to those who did not understand its religious

1870s as representatives of the United States gov¬

meaning,- their most sacred artifacts, ikupasuy

ernment, which had pledged technical assistance

(fig. 1.12), were insensitively labeled "mustache-

to the new Meiji government for the develop¬

lifters",- their technology was described as

ment of Hokkaido's natural resources (Kotani,

among the most "primitive" in the world

this volume).
Reports by these travelers and officials

14

To Western eyes the exotic nature of the
Ainu was reinforced by their many curious cus¬

INTRODUCTION / W. FITZHUCH

(Hitchcock 1891b: 432),- and to top it off, early
anthropologists tended to see the Ainu as an ob-

collected for the Smithsonian in 1888, spoke for
many holding these views:
Formerly, it is said, the Ainos [sic] were
subject to a powerful and wealthy chief,
who lived at Piratori and received tribute
from all the Ainos in the land. This is
related by the Ainos themselves. . .

They

number among their household treasures
old Japanese swords and curios, which
have been handed down from past
generations. They now use Japanese
knives instead of stone implements and
metal arrow-heads in place of flint. But it
is scarcely a century since they emerged
from the stone age, and otherwise they
have not passed beyond it.
We have here a remarkable instance of
the close association of two distinct races,
one superior and powerful, the other de¬
graded and weak, working together day
by day, living in contiguous villages, in¬
termarrying more or less, and yet, after a
century of such intimacy, as distinct in
their character, habits of life, superstitions
and beliefs as though they had never
come together. The Aino has not so much
as learned to make a reputable bow and
arrow, although in the past he has had to
meet the Japanese, who are famous ar¬
chers, in many battles. It is a most remark¬
able example of the persistence of distinct
types together, when the conditions are
1.13

1.13

apparently favorable for the absorption of
Ainu and the “Caucasoid

Hypothesis”

This Ainu elder, dressed in a ceremo¬
nial robe with a woven sword carrier
over his shoulder and wearing a head¬

ject of geographic curiosity—"an island of
1954: 278) — rather than as a culture worthy of
respect on its own terms. All of these views, in¬

dress decorated with wood shavings

cluding those of well-informed local observers

(inaw-kike), epitomizes the image of

like John Batchelor, who lived almost sixty years

the “Caucasoid” race that was pro¬

with the Ainu (Batchelor 1892), are now recog¬

moted when Europeans first gained
access to the Ainu. Although scholars
no longer claim Aryan ancestry for
the Ainu, their biological history is

BY SOMETH' HITCHCOCK.

r“S.>

E who In distant lands
leaves the beaten paths
and seeks for adven¬
ture or discovery, may
often And either nearer
than he thinks. The
far East ia not all un¬
known, yet it teems
with unstudied prob¬
lems of the deepest
interest to those who
will bat think of them
and pass bat a few
steps beyond the nar¬
row bounds of tbe
foreign settlements.
Tbe small group of
Islands known as Japan is inhabited by a people
ef unknown origin. Wo are content to speak
of them as Japanese, and for oar present pur¬
pose it is not required to know more concern¬
ing them. Bat scattered along the coasts from
tbe north as far as to the extreme southern
end of Kinsfain, there are found traces of a
different people, who must have occupied the
country in prehistoric times.
Be cent explorations have led to tbe concluiion that these aborigines are representatives
of a race known as Ainos, who are dow con¬
fined to tbe island of Yezo, in the north of
Japan.

Few of these collectors were trained in eth¬
nology or anthropology, which were embryonic
sciences until the late 1890s, and they brought a

reans, and Chinese. Most specialists

variety of interests and biases to their work. The

now believe the Ainu are a remnant of

idea of systematic museum collecting had barely

an ancient Paleo-Asian population

begun, and the interrelation between cultural

tion now dominant in Japan arrived.

ern Japan.

nized as being based on superficial or flawed an¬

recent Mongoloids like Japanese, Ko¬

archipelago before the ethnic popula¬

They Live in the Kuriles and North¬

thropological reasoning.

still elusive and differs from that of

that occupied parts of the Japanese

A QUEER PEOPLE,

Caucasoids in a sea of Mongoloids" (Fdarrison

subsystems (e.g., archaeology, ethnology, linguis¬
tics, physical anthropology, and folklore) was not
understood. The museum strategy that dominated

1.14 A Queer People

these efforts was twofold: to gather and record

On 15 March 1890, with this quizzical

data from vanishing "exotic" peoples and to

title the Washington Evening Star an¬

present it in displays and exhibitions to a public

nounced the opening of a Smithsonian
Ainu exhibit based on Hitchcock’s
1888 collections. In those days, racial
and cultural differences fascinated the

that had become voracious in its appetite for nonWestern curiosities. The museum and exposition
displays that followed carried a clear message: as a

American public and were trumped up

culture (and in part, as people) the Ainu, like the

in the media, which sensationalized

American Indian and native peoples in many other

anthropological “discoveries.”

areas of the world colonized by Europeans, would
soon become extinct. Romyn Fditchcock, who
1-14

l/AIN LI

ETHNICITY

15

works by Batchelor, Chamberlain, Munro, and
others in bibliography). These publications and
results of anthropological collecting that ap¬
peared in museum exhibits, expositions, and me¬
dia accounts reinforced the popular idea that the
Ainu would soon cease to exist. Despite the
trappings of contemporaiy social bias, popular
accounts by travelers read as stark pronounce¬
ments on the desperate, impoverished situation
of the people they met and villages they visited,
of discrimination practiced by Japanese officials,
and of the need for medical attention and
schooling. By this time many Ainu had already
been displaced from coastal villages and prime
agricultural lands and forests that were coming
under cultivation by Japanese farmers and
American-trained foresters.
Where scholars first ventured, the media
soon followed, sensationalizing Ainu presenta¬
tions at expositions and museum exhibitions.
The first such presentation took place in Europe
(Vienna 1873), and others soon followed in
North America, at the Smithsonian in the 1890s
and elsewhere, reaching a climax in North
America in the living Ainu village (fig. 1.16) pre¬
sented at the 1904 Louisiana Exposition in St.
Louis (Starr 1904; VanStone 1993,- Breitbart
1997). One of the more egregious titles of this
era appeared on a book written by A. Henry
Savage Landor (1 893), Alone with the Hairy Ainu.
Or 3,800 Miles on a Pack Saddle in Yezo and a Cruise to
the Kurile Islands. Once beyond its provocative
and objectionable tone, however, the book con¬
tains useful early descriptions of the Ainu and
their lands.
While North American museums could
not resist the allure of the "mysterious Ainu,"
most institutions found themselves conflicted
1.16

by their obligations to publish and curate Ainu
1.15 Twined Basket

one by the other. The Ainos, being unable

collections they had acquired. Because Ainu

Ainu used the bark of the Japanese elm

to affiliate more closely with the Japanese,

culture was considered a native society and not

to make a strong fiber (ohyo) that was

remain distinct and apart, and are therefore

an Asian "high civilization," Ainu collections

woven into baskets or, with the aid of a

doomed to extinction from the face of the

held by fine art museums tended to be ne¬

backstrap loom, a durable cloth (attush)

earth (Hitchcock 1891b: 432-33).

glected until recently. Further, Japan was far

that was the basis for Hokkaido Ainu
clothing. Both types of Ainu baskets—

Hitchcock had heard of a more glorious

from North America, and the staffs of North

woven baskets (saranip) and coiled bas¬

Ainu past from Ainu oral history but understood

American natural history and anthropology

kets (tenki, present only in the Kuriles)—

their decline only as a social evolutionary failure

museums gave priority to their growing collec¬

are similar to Alaskan Eskimo and Aleut

in the face of more advanced civilizations. The

tions of North American Indian materials. Be¬

basketry forms. (AMNH 70.2.932)

case of the Ainu was also instructive to Americans

cause the primary motivation for building Ainu

who saw the Ainu in much the same light as they

collections was tied more closely to public curi¬

saw the American Indians, whose societies also

osity, institution building, and world fair exposi¬

seemed to be vanishing as the nineteenth-century

tions than to scholarly research, most of the

Purchase Centennial Exposition in St.

American frontier advanced. The decline of the

Ainu collections gathered between 1885 and

Louis in 1904. Both Starr and photogra¬

Ainu may even have been seen by some as justifi¬

1920 soon went off display and were relegated

pher Jesse Tarbox Beals documented

cation for the righteousness of Western colonial

to deep storage. In those natural history muse¬

the experiences of the Ainu in St. Louis.

policies supported by notions of social superior¬

ums where Ainu exhibits remained, they were

ity and technological progress.

sensationalized with descriptions of the "enig¬

1.16 “All the World’s a Stage”
Anthropologist Frederick Starr brought a
group of Hokkaido Ainu to the Louisiana

As “live” exhibits, Ainu demonstrated
arts and technology while living in an
Ainu house on the fairgrounds. Here

A considerable number of these early trav¬

matic" or "disappearing" Ainu, and in most

Shutratek weaves a grass mat while her

elers, scientists, and museum collectors pub¬

shy daughter hides from the visitors.

lished scientific reports (Bickmore 1868,- Morse

North American museums Ainu collections did
indeed "disappear" into the curatorial void for

(NAA 98-10289)

I 879,- Bird 1881,- Hitchcock 1891a, b,- see also

most of the twentieth century.

16

INTRODUCTION / W. FITZHUGH

Theories of Ainu Origin

even North American Indian and Eskimo rela¬

The dominant informational perspective on

tionships (Tamura, this volume). The difficulty

Ainu culture that emerged from these early de¬

in determining linguistic origins has much to

cades of museum collecting is that of anthropol¬

do with problems in reconstructing and tracing

ogy, which, during the past century, explored

linguistic change over thousands of years, dur¬

the "Ainu enigma" from the vantage points of

ing which linguistic borrowing can obscure

physical anthropology, archaeology, linguistics,

even dominant strains of heritage and ancestry.

and ethnology (H. Watanabe 1972). Despite a

Contact and interchange with Japanese over

century of study, however, surprisingly little

two thousand or more years makes this particu¬

progress has been made in achieving definitive

lar relationship hard to decipher. Scholars no

conclusions about Ainu origins—the very ques¬

longer seriously consider Indo-European ties,

tion that stimulated scholarly interest in the

but Altaic and Austronesian links, as well as ties

Ainu in the first place, even before it became

to North Pacific and American Indian languages,

possible for foreigners to conduct field studies in

are still being discussed. The word "unknown"

Hokkaido. Other scholars update the inquiry

still remains the most cogent summary that

into these issues in Part 1, but a cursory review in

most Ainu linguists can agree on.
One line of inquiry that was initially pur¬

this introduction may help the reader find topics
of particular interest.
First there is the issue of "racial" or what is
now generally known as "biological" origins

0
1.18

1.18

5 cm
---J

Early Ainu Art

Some of the earliest artifacts with

sued as a means of determining Ainu cultural ori¬
gins has effectively been removed from the
table. In the early years of anthropology it was

(fig. 1 17). Who are the Ainu, and how and

believed that ethnology—the study of living

where did their physical type develop? Are

cultures and its material, behavioral, and social

they derived from Mongoloid, Australoid, or

forms—could offer insights into the deep his¬

Caucasoid populations, and what is the signifi¬

tory of cultures. This approach was taken at the

cance of their physical differences from other

turn of the century by the Russian ethnologist

East Asian populations like the Japanese, Kore¬

Leo Shternberg and others who believed that

ans, Chinese, or northeast Siberians who, while

similarities between Ainu material culture and

each population is physically distinct, resemble

customs and those of southeast Asian and

each other more than any of them resembles

Austronesian peoples pointed toward a southern

the Ainu? Although Europoid or Aryan origins

origin of Ainu culture (reviewed in Arutiunov,

were stressed early on, modern biological stud¬

this volume). However, anthropologists today

ies have converged toward the consensus that

generally consider ethnological parallels, trait-list

the Ainu represent descendants of relatively

comparisons, folklore, and other types of etho-

undifferentiated East Asian tipper Paleolithic

logical data as incapable of providing reliable

populations whose gene pool remained geo¬

evidence for reconstaicting cultural history,

graphically isolated for thousands of years dur¬

believing these data to be too malleable and

ing which the development of more special¬

susceptible to borrowing or reinvention, be¬

ized Mongoloid features took place in

sides being impossible to verify. Ultimately, the

mainland East Asia (Kozintsev 1993,- Arutiunov,

problem for ethnological reconstruction is the

ethnic Ainu designs come from the

Ishida, this volume). It is therefore likely that

lack of chronological depth, because ethnologi¬

Bibi-8 site near the modern-day

older Ainu populations were once more distinct

cal evidence exists only within the range of

Chitose Airport. Among the well-pre¬

from Japanese and Amur River populations

written or oral history.

served wooden finds were a paddle

with whom they have been mixing increasingly

bearing images of killer whales and
engraved spiral designs (known to
Ainu as morew) similar to patterns

It is for this reason that archaeological re-

during recent millennia and centuries. The
question still remains whether Ainu ancestry

embroidered on Ainu garments, (after

might include eastern Siberian or East Asian

Ohtsuka 1993)

populations or their ancestors, who moved into

1.17

chaeological evidence from Alaska and the rest

Paleolithic

the Americas at the end of the Ice Age. Ar¬
Population History Model

Marked physical differences between
the Ainu and Ryukyu people (who live
at the southern end of the Japanese
archipelago) and the Japanese and

of the Americas suggests that the earliest
peoples to enter the Americas were not members
of a single homogeneous group but carried dif¬

other Asian peoples have raised puz¬

ferent cultural traditions originating from north¬

zling questions about their biological

ern, central, and southern maritime sectors of

histories. Kazuro Hanihara believes

northeast Asia (Mochanov 1980,- Hoffecker,

Jomon to be the ancestral culture of

Power, and Goebel 1993).

Ainu, Ryukyu, and Japanese peoples,
but sees Honshu Jomon as influ¬
enced by Yayoi migrants with a more
Mongoloid physical type who arrived

Equally perplexing issues have arisen with
regard to Ainu linguistic affiliations. These theo¬
ries are as diverse and wide-ranging as those

more recently in Japan, (after

proposed for biological ties and include Indo-

Hanihara 1991)

European, Austronesian, Altaic, Chinese, and

I / AINU

ETHNICITY

1.17

17

ements of the Jomon tradition. Most archaeolo¬
gists see Satsumon as the most likely immediate
ancestor of modern Ainu culture in northern
Honshu and southern Hokkaido, while
Satsumon-influenced Okhotsk culture, a north¬
ern culture, is believed to be the source of Sa¬
khalin and Kurile Ainu culture (fig. 1.17).
Despite progress in understanding the
broader cultural outline described above, much
work is needed to fill the conspicuous gap from
about A.D. 1000 to 1400 that exists between ar¬
chaeological evidence and historic Ainu
peoples. This is the crucial period in the emer¬
gence of Ainu culture, and its study has proved
difficult because of the near "invisibility" of ar¬
chaeological evidence dating to this period. Fol¬
lowing the previous period in which Satsumon
and Okhotsk cultures are recognizable
archaeologically by their distinctive pithouses
and settlement types, ceramic traditions, midden
deposits, and art forms, the subsequent shift to
surface dwellings, short-term occupations, lack
of middens, replacement of ceramics and stone
tools by metal vessels and iron implements ob¬
tained by trade, use of wood rather than more
durable ceramics or bone, and abandonment of
most types of figurative art resulted in a major
reduction in archaeological traces. So far, only a
few sites, such as the Chitose Airport site near
Sapporo, contain artifacts with Ainu-like designs
(fig. 1.1 8) documenting the transition between
earlier archaeological horizons and "Ainu" as
known ethnologically (Ohtsuka 1993: 19—20).
Today the "Ainu enigma" continues to elicit
speculation and controversy, not least among
Ainu who are actively participating in the search
and do not hesitate to express their own ideas
about their origins as a non-Japanese ethnic
people. It is fair to say that proprietorship of "the
search has come to the fore as the primary his¬

Ainu problem" no longer lies exclusively with non-

This Ainu-e (-e means picture in Japa¬

torical method for researching cultural origins

Ainu historians, archaeologists, and anthropolo¬

nese) is one of a series of Ainu chief¬

(Utagawa 1989,- T. Kikuchi 1988,- Yamaura and

gists,- Ainu are also joining the scholarly ranks

Ushiro, and S. Sasaki, this volume). In this field,

and are participating in public debates over such

some of the earliest scientific shell-mound exca¬

issues as the appropriateness of studying Ainu

1.19

Ainu Chieftain

tains painted in the late 1700s by the
Japanese artist Hakyo Kakizaki. Kakizaki
had access to Ainu chiefs who came to
the Matsumae seat for trade and official

vations conducted in the 1870s by Heinrich von

human-skeletal remains and the ownership of ar¬

visits. His illustrations have great artistic

Siebold in Omori, Edward Morse in Tokyo Bay,

chaeological finds. The social and political issues

and ethnographic merit and also reveal

and Romyn Hitchcock (1891a) in the Kuriles

connected with "when Ainu became Ainu" and

Japanese curiosity, repulsion, and fear of

and Hokkaido provided a foundation for mod¬

"who the Ainu are" are rapidly becoming as com¬

the Ainu. This chieftain, Nishikomake,

ern archaeological studies by Japanese archae¬

plex politically as the studies are scientifically.

has dressed to impress his Japanese
overlords by wearing a valuable Santan
silk robe over his Ainu retarpe (elm-bark)
garment. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

ologists by suggesting for the first time ties be¬
tween living Ainu people and the prehistoric
Jomon culture of Japan. Today there is nearly

Ainu Ethnicity as

complete agreement that Ainu origins lie with

Historical Process

the Jomon culture, which occupied much of the

Hitchcock's interest in Ainu history was not

Japanese archipelago throughout the Holocene

shared by many other museum collectors or

and persisted in an evolved form in Hokkaido

early anthropologists. The latter, who in any

until circa A.D. 500. On Honshu, Jomon culture

case could not read Japanese, were more con¬

was replaced by the forerunners of the modern

cerned with comparing Ainu culture and physi¬

Japanese state about 2,000 years ago, while in

cal type with other known groups than with

Hokkaido it was replaced by Okhotsk and

poring over archival records for information

Satsumon cultures, which, however, retained el¬

about the Ainu, who first appear in Japanese his-

INTRODUCTION / W. F1TZHUGH

1.20

1.20 Making It Ainu
Creating objects with a distinctive
Ainu character from iocal and foreign
materials is typical of Ainu cultural
production. This smoking kit collected
by E. Odium in Shana, the Kuriles, is
a modernized version of the traditional
form (see fig. 1.21) but includes such
traditional elements as the large blue
glass bead and a bearskin pouch.
(ROM 888.6.13)
1.21 Traditional Tobacco Box

This old tobacco box made in tradi¬
tional Ainu fashion displays the fine
carving done by men to adorn their
most treasured possessions; it was
collected in Okotsonai by Frederick
Starr in 1904. Tobacco boxes were
often inlaid with antler, especially in
Sakhalin, but in this piece the inlay is
ivory, a northern trade item. Men
wore their smoking gear at their
belts. An old Ainu story tells of a man
defending himself from a bear attack
using only his sturdy pipe holder and
tobacco box. (BMA 12.661)

torical accounts in the seventh century. Never¬
theless, the oral history Ainu people presented
to Hitchcock about their once-powerful status
as a regional power linking northern Japan with
the Asian coast is now more accessible and is the
subject of numerous presentations in Part II
This history presents a surprising new view
(considering previous stereotypes of the Ainu as
a forest-dwelling people) of the Ainu as a mari¬
time-based trading power whose political and
social organization bore little resemblance to the
Ainu lifestyle encountered by late-nineteenthcentury visitors and scholars (Harrison 1954,
Howell 1994, 1995, and this volume). An in¬
kling of this past is suggested in the Ainu-e por¬
traits of Ainu chieftains painted by Hakyo
Kakizaki between 1783 and 1800 (fig. 1.19),
which show Ainu leaders as powerful figures who,
almost until the end of the eighteenth century,
waged war, governed their people, managed lu¬
crative trading empires between the Asian main¬
land and Japan, and conducted their business as
local sovereigns. The details of this Japanese-Ainu
contact history were first made available to En¬
glish readers in Shinichiro Takakura's important
work, The Ainu of Northern Japan: A Study in Concjuest
and Acculturation (I960).
Essays in Part II of this volume document
the history of Ainu relations with the Japanese at
different points in time,- they also illustrate the
importance of northern cultural and economic
ties to the Ainu, the gradual eclipse of Ainu ca¬
pabilities in the face of growing Russian and
Japanese competition, and adverse effects on
the Ainu from changes in market forces, weap¬

I / AINU ETHNICITY

onry, and shipping technology that forced them
to take a subservient position when their south¬
ern neighbors grew more powerful and advanced
into northern Honshu and eventually into Hok¬
kaido. In the meantime, spurred by the threat of
Russian imperial advances, the Tokugawa
Shogunate began to take a more active role in
promoting its national interests by placing its
undefended northern territories under political
control. Ainu resisted and attempted to maintain
their independence using military means,- but in
each case—for instance, Shakushain's War of
1669, and lastly, the battle of Kunashiri-Menashi
in 1789—the Ainu lost more and more until they
were forced to submit in every respect to the
central government's interests operating through
the Matsumae seat at Hakodate in southwestern
Hokkaido. By the eighteenth century the Ainu
had lost direct control over almost all of their
former territories and resources, with the excep¬
tion of fur and other products of the forest. By
this process the Ainu lost a major portion of
their subsistence-resource base, their external
economic opportunities, and, with the spread of
introduced diseases (Walker, this volume), much
of their demographic base. Other essays in this
volume (Siddle and Part VI) carry this changing
historical image of the Ainu forward into the late
twentieth century, with a storyline that follows
the same basic trend toward denouement.
Making It Ainu
The Ainu did not lose control of their culture
or their symbols and trappings of Ainu
ethnicity. Despite losses to Russia and Japan,
the Ainu were not powerless in the face of their
declining economic and political fortunes.
Rather, history reveals that they utilized a vari¬
ety of techniques and resources to maintain in¬
dependence, deal effectively with neighbors,
and reaffirm cultural identity: while they suf-

19

nities for renegotiating these relationships with
other societies diminished, the goods and mate¬
rials received were put to use in creating private
and public manifestations of Ainu culture.
One aspect of external relationships has
recently been illuminated by a new type of ar¬
chaeological evidence: charred seeds and husks.
Ethnography and historical data describe the
Ainu diet for several centuries as based on hunt¬
ing, fishing, and foraging (Kohara, this volume).
Intensive agriculture was not practiced, al¬
1.22 Woman with Weaving Instrument

though small homestead gardens produced po¬

Frederick Starr collected a volume of

tatoes, millet, and various legumes. Rice was not

Ainu-e during one of his trips to Japan,

grown locally even though it was an important

and after his death his widow donated it

supplement and was used later in ritual contexts

to the Smithsonian. In this image from

as sake and rice cakes. It has been supposed that

Curious Sights of Ezo Island, painted by
Shimanojo Murakami in 1799, a tat¬

the modern Ainu diet faithfully represented the

tooed Ainu woman wearing beaded

economic activities of early Ainu, or pre-Ainu

necklaces and holding a weaving shuttle

peoples like the Satsumon, who probably were

is shown. (NMNH 392,023-25)

also Ainu. However, new data from tenth-cen¬
tury Satsumon sites (Crawford and Yoshizaki
fered increasingly negative rates in their trade

1992) reveal a much wider assemblage of culti-

traders, Ainu continued to manage independent

gens of local, Japanese, and continental origin,

trade into the late eighteenth century (S. Sasaki,

including various strains of rice. These finds

this volume). The Kakizaki paintings clearly

have been interpreted as indicating that

document the results of accumulated power and

Satsumon people were more agriculturally ori¬

wealth, but Ainu-e show that underneath the

ented than the historic Ainu and may have had a

prestigious Santan silk overgowns they wore for

larger and more stable population base, more

formal occasions were traditional bark-cloth

extensive political organization, and greater

(attusb) leggings decorated in Ainu patterns (fig.

military capabilities. If so, the Ainu economy

1.19),- they also carried Ainu knives, pipe holders,

and settlement patterns may have developed

tobacco cases, bows, and other implements

their more nomadic characteristics since

decorated with Ainu designs.

Satsumon times to obtain fur and other forest

The political decline of the Ainu can be

products to exchange for Japanese trade goods,

attributed to strategic, structural, and organiza¬

foods, and tobacco (figs. 120, 1.21). Changes in

tional circumstances. Given the geography of

domestic architecture favoring surface building

Ainu territories, dependence on natural renew¬

over pithouse winter dwellings would also fit

able maritime and forest resources, limitations

the pattern of the shift from Satsumon to Ainu

enforced by the lack of industrial technologies,

culture in the twelfth to fourteenth centuries.

a low and dispersed population base, and other

These and other changes are consistent with the

factors, it was inevitable that the Ainu would

increased economic specialization that came as

eventually be forced to relinquish regional

Ainu dependence upon the Japanese market

power and accept a new political and economic

economy intensified

reality. Hokkaido, the Kuriles, and Sakhalin

20

1987,- Crawford and Takamiya 1990,- Crawford

exchanges with Japanese and mainland Santan

The Ainu practice of incorporating for¬

were rich in natural products, but once the Ainu

eign elements—be they foods, materials,

had become engaged in trade with the expand¬

styles, symbols, or words and concepts—into

ing regional powers in Manchuria, Japan, Korea,

the social and spiritual heart of its culture and

and Russia, their dependence on industrial prod¬

"making them Ainu" by redefining them in an

ucts ensnared them in the economic mesh of ex¬

Ainu way is both a striking and a curious feature

panding nations and they could no longer main¬

of Ainu culture. Even an informal inventory of

tain a favorable trade balance. Iron products,

Ainu material culture reveals a welter of goods

rice for food and sake, cotton fabric for cloth¬

and concepts obtained through trade, political

ing, lacquerware, Japanese knives, axes, hoes,

and social contacts, or replication of foreign

swords, and a host of other goods had become

goods. Many such objects, materials, and ideas

indispensable to Ainu identity and survival. The

are seen in Ainu-e paintings (fig. 1.19). Japanese

Ainu gradually became inextricably linked to

swords were an important part of a man's formal

the Japanese economic system, and to a lesser

attire and had important ritual functions in exor¬

extent, in northern regions, were dependent on

cism and curing ceremonies. In its Ainu adapta¬

Manchuria and Russia for silk, glass, brass, and

tion, the sword had to be worn across the back

other products Nevertheless, even as opportu¬

rather than at one's side (Japanese fashion) and

INTRODUCTION / ¥ FITZHUGH

was tethered with a specially woven halter and

nition of Ainu-ness. Even as their territories di¬

strap (fig. 12.1). Lacquer cups and saucers (tuki)

minished and population declined, their material

of Japanese manufacture became a principal ob¬

world expanded and incorporated increasing

ject in the offering of sake (also imported) with

amounts of foreign imports, redefined as Ainu.

Ainu prayers to the gods, together with the
completely original and distinctive Ainu ikupasuy

Ainu Ethnicity in Spirit and Art

(prayer stick,- Maraini, this volume), while large

Despite—or perhaps because of—economic

lacquer containers were regarded as family trea¬

and political setbacks, the Ainu maintained

sures that were displayed in the sacred corner of

strength in the parts of their lives that contin¬

the house and were believed to host gods of

ued to identify them as Ainu: their formal

their own. Inaw, the shaved sticks that symbolize

clothing,- their woven baskets and sword straps,-

birds and help deliver human prayers to the

their yukar, storytelling, and music,- their prayers

gods, resemble the sacred shavings of Japanese

to the gods, offered with tuki (sake cup and sau¬

Shinto ritual and Siberian concepts of birds as

cer), ikupasuy (prayer stick), and maw (shaved

spirit-helpers,- even words central to Ainu reli¬

sticks that serve as messengers to the gods),- and

gion like kamuy (deity), nomi (prayer), onkami

their social and ceremonial events, of which the

(worship) are thought to have Japanese origin

iyomante and other spirit-sending ceremonies

(Kindaichi 1944, 1993: 238-39,-Obayashi 1997:

(described here by Watanabe, Akino, and

9,- Tamura, this volume). Among many other

Lltagawa) are the core element of traditional

1.24 Maxim with Bead and Bear

items central to Ainu identity were glass beads

Ainu social identity. Watanabe believed that

As with their smoking gear, men deco¬

(obtained first from the Manchurian and Russian

rated their knives and sheaths with

sending back the spirit of a captive bear to the

trade, then from Japan, and finally secretly

god's world, with all the elaborate ritual that it

manufactured in Hakodate for the Ainu trade),-

entails, was the essential core of Ainu identity,-

highly individualistic carvings that ad¬
vertised both the value they placed

bronze and copper medallions, beads, wire, and

Utagawa believes the iyomante is the institution

artistic skill. Despite their great diver¬

small ornaments,- silk robes from Manchuria and

that helped Ainu culture survive centuries of
economic and political oppression.

on these possessions as well as their
sity, such designs fall within an Ainu

cotton garments from Japan,- and many other

design universe that includes such

materials and objects. Using a variety of design

foreign elements as the use of glass

styles (Dubreuil, Kodama, this volume) the Ainu

beads and netsuke-like ornaments, in
this case, a bear, a rarity in nonritual
Ainu art. (MPM N17058)

In traditional Ainu belief every living
thing, every being whether animate or inani¬

combined and refashioned these foreign materi¬

mate, is a god and a visitor to earth from the

als or gave them new social or ritual purposes,

god world (Fujimura, this volume). These gods

making them distinctively Ainu. This ability to

spend time on earth and make their bodies—

create Ainu-ness out of foreign materials is a re¬

their material forms—available to people for

markable feature of Ainu culture. While one's

food, timber to build houses, grass to make

attire may have been nearly exclusively of foreign

mats, and elm bark for weaving attush clothing.

origin, it still maintained an unmistakably Ainu

People are meant to use these godly gifts but

ethnic character. In this way style and ceremony

must do so with respect, and after using them,

have been central to the changing, evolving defi¬

must return the spirit to the god world with a
ritual spirit-sending ceremony. The most elabo¬
rate sending ceremonies are reserved for the
chief Ainu deities—bears, owls, and foxes—
but even spirits of small animals like songbirds
or seemingly inconsequential objects like a bro¬
ken kettle or knife may have its spirit sent off to
the god world with a special prayer, an inaw,
and ritual observances. Ainu believed that
were these rituals to be denied, the earth would
soon become barren and lifeless, for the gods
would no longer be willing to visit to offer their
material bodies, and life would not regenerate.
In this way Ainu pay respect to all worldly be¬
ings and treat them as living entities, as partners
in human existence. Modern Ainu reaffirm
these beliefs in traditional ceremonies as well as
in private prayers during their daily lives. This
Ainu philosophy of reverence and partnership
with nature is worth reflecting upon today as
we contemplate the hubris of mankind's de¬
structive relationship with planet Earth.
The Ainu spirit is also evident in the exu¬
berance of its artistic expression, not only in the
design of clothing and the creativity of its liter-

21

1,26

tual concepts behind their

Eskimo Spirit Carving

Faces of spirits and spirit-helpers are

creations, even though

common motifs in ancient and ethno¬

many of these concepts are

graphic art of the Bering Sea Eskimos.

not verbalized or accessible

This beastly semihuman image from a

to outsiders.

harpoon counterweight excavated at

Perhaps the most ex¬

the 1,500-year-old Ekven site on the
Russian side of Bering Strait is thought

plicit acknowledgment of

to represent the spirit-controller of ani¬

spiritual involvement in

mals. Nearly identical images appear on

women's art is found in the

nineteenth-century Bering Sea Eskimo

sacred woven belts and straps

harpoons, suggesting an unbroken

(fig. 31.10) that women wore

2,000-year tradition of art and belief.

as personal amulets to safe¬

(MAE 6479-9-208)

guard virtue and fertility,similar beliefs may have been
incorporated in the wearing
1.26

1.23

of beaded necklaces and
metal medallions, for such

Nanai Motif

Ainu traded with the Nanai of the lower

ary tradition but in the everyday production of

belief was common among Siberian tribes from

Amur River area and knew their cos¬

Ainu woodcarvers and artisans. Traditionally,

whom many of these adornments were ob¬

tume designs. Nanai fishskin robes

religious beliefs prohibited carving or using im¬

tained. Similar protective powers were inherent

carry embroidery showing beastlike

ages of animals or humans, for Ainu believed

in the woven strap and harnesses (emusbat) used

images that resemble ancient Chinese

that this would bring danger or bad luck. Ainu

to hold a man's sword (fig. 7.2). In the days

carvers and seamstresses today deny (Dubreuil,

when Ainu traders braved dangers abroad and

t'ao-t'ieh designs. Cryptic ‘‘faces,’’
some resembling owls—the Ainu god of

this volume)—as Nanai and Nivkhi seamstresses

fought enemies at their doorstep, a man's sword

of the lower Amur denied in 1900 (Laufer

was a treasured weapon,- later, after the sword

say these images are only decorative

1902)—that their carvings and clothing decora¬

became more important as a ceremonial object

and do not represent animals, gods, or

tions contain images of animals or beasts (figs.

than as a weapon, its harness still retained great

other beings. (MAE 313-18/7)

1.23, 1.25); except in the special case of human

spiritual power and was used for exorcism and

dolls (nipopo) traditionally used in Sakhalin for

for healing. Even if we never know their precise

the village—occasionally appear in Ainu
art, but Ainu, like their Amur neighbors,

1.25

Morew Pattern

This detail from an attush (elm-bark)
apron displays the spiral designs known
to Ainu as morew and the embroidered

healing and shamanism and carvings of animals

meanings, the patterns and imagery Ainu artists

(especially bears and fish) on ikupasuy used by men

use give spiritual meaning, life, and power to

for sending ceremonies, the Ainu did not use hu¬

many forms of their material culture.

“thorns’’ that protect the spiral's corners.

man or animal representations in their art. Debate

Ainu men had an equally complex and

Both motifs are thought to have powers

even exists among the Ainu about statements by

spiritually rich domain that centered around their

that protect one’s back. They are found

some Ainu seamstresses that the spikes appended

role as woodcarvers. Men produced all manner of

near openings and edges of garments

to "turns" in Ainu morew (spiral) patterns (fig.

objects from wood, using axes, knives, and chis¬

1.25) represent "thorns" that protect the wearer's

els. In addition to serving functional purposes,

back and other vulnerable spots of one's clothing

knives, tobacco boxes, food-serving implements,

designs as “flaming borders” and assert

(neck, shoulders, and garment margins) from

trays, containers, and weaving implements were

that they give ancient heroes power and

evil spirits. Suffice it to say that Ainu garment

also decorated with complex carved patterns

protection from their enemies.

artists have employed a complex set of spiri¬

ranging from geometric to floral and abstract de-

22

INTRODUCTION / W. FITZHUCH

and such vulnerable areas as turns in
the design where evil gods can gain en¬
try. Ainu yukar (oral tales) refer to these

1.27

Sealskin Boots

Like other North Pacific peoples, the
Ainu of Sakhalin Island utilized sea
mammals for food, oil, and many
types of clothing. Sealskin boots were
more durable and waterproof than

signs. While all of these items became objects of
great interest to museum collectors, decorated
bowls and trays became important in the growing
Ainu tourist-art trade. Some of the objects ob¬
tained by the first Americans and Europeans who

any other type of footgear until the

traveled in Hokkaido after 1868 show little or no

invention of rubber and were usually

use or patina, suggesting that market art was al¬

worn with grass insulation. This pair,

ready an established feature of Ainu economic life

collected from Sakhalin before 1893,
seems never to have been used.
(FMC 32104)

1.28

Kurile Needlecases

(see Dubreuil, this volume). This skill, seen both
in carving and artistic expression, is best demon¬
strated in the carving of ikupasuy, the sacred
prayer sticks employed by men for sending their

This group of tubular needlecases

prayers to the gods (Maraini, this volume). Here,

ornamented with whale-tail forms was

and only here, men indulged their creativity in a

collected from the Kurile island of

wide range of subject matter, including the only

Shikotan in 1875 or 1893 by

culturally sanctioned representations of animals

Alexander Agassiz. Kurile Ainu arti¬
facts are quite rare. The form and
designs on these needlecases, like

1.28

and objects otherwise forbidden in the Ainu

alism (Hallowell 1926), that suggested north¬

artistic repertoire.

ern cultural continuities into Siberia and around
the North Pacific rim. While some design sys¬

Kurile basketry traditions, are similar
to Alaskan Eskimo styles, suggesting

Ainu as a Northern People

tems and motifs originated from contact with

northern contacts. (PMC 51631)

Ainu artistry in woodcarving and garment de¬

Japanese, Korean, or other East Asian groups,

sign continues to attract the attention of anthro¬

the fundamental design of most Ainu art is

pologists and art historians and has been one of

most closely related to northern styles. The use

the features of Ainu culture, like bear ceremoni¬

of spiral or meander (morew) patterns and of the
"Escher-like" positive-negative image-shifting
approaches is basic to Ainu traditional textile
art; it is also a dominant pattern in the tradi¬
tional clothing styles of the Nanai, Nivkhi, and
Oroch peoples of the lower Amur River region
(fig. 1.23). The stylistic Ainu-Amur connections
are quite direct and are observable geographi¬
cally as style gradients. Similar systems (includ¬
ing transformation and cryptic animal-based
art) underlie the ethnographic art of Northwest
Coast cultures and prehistoric Eskimo art (fig.
1.26) of the Bering Sea (Fitzhugh 1988, 1993).
Similar masked images are also sometimes
found in Ainu art, where owls (the protecting
deity of the Ainu village) seem to peer out from
carved platters and textile designs. Future ar¬
chaeological work will eventually determine if
such designs are related to the widespread
North Pacific art tradition (which seems to be
manifest also in Chou and Shang art) that is
based on spiritual transformation, hunting
magic, and ceremonialism. A more specific ar¬
gument for Ainu connections to the north may
be seen in comparisons of Ainu and southwest
Alaskan Eskimo coiled and twined basketry,
which are nearly identical (Graburn and Lee,
this volume), as well as needlecases and a few
other objects (fig. 1.28). Some of these similari¬
ties may have been inherited by Ainu artists
through traditions of the Okhotsk culture,
while others, like coiled basketry, may result
from more recent historical contacts, for in¬
stance, between the Ainu and Aleut hunters
brought from Alaska by Russian fur traders
(Shubin 1994).
These are some examples of the material
manifestations of northern cultural influence or

1.27

I / AINU ETHNICITY

23

Goodman and Nomoto, Oginaka, this volume).
These northern and maritime traditions are
mostly absent from the object record in North
American museums, which primarily represent
Hokkaido Ainu who lived in forest and river set¬
tings,- this perspective differs radically from the
usual Western image of the Ainu as described in
ethnographic accounts since the 1860s (Batchelor
1892,- H. Watanabe 1973,- Hilger 1971).

Transitions: Forests, Bears,
and Modern Art
The final section of this book (Part V and VI)
brings into focus the more recent history of
Ainu in Hokkaido in articles by historians, art¬
ists, leaders, and elders discussing modern
events, political resistance, cultural preservation
and rejuvenation, and cultural visions. This cen¬
tury was no easier on the Ainu than others had
been, for it coincided with their total subservi¬
ence to Japanese administration, beginning with
the passage of the Former Hokkaido Aborigines
Protection Act of 1899. This act was meant to
promote rapid Ainu assimilation into Japanese
1.30

Sea Otter

Takeki Fujito, one of the finest modern
Ainu artists, calls himself kumahori
(“bear carver”) and prides himself on

heritage in Ainu culture. Similar features of cer¬

society (Siddle, this volume) and imposed harsh

emonial traditions include the first salmon cer¬

and restrictive conditions on Ainu existence and

emony that is common to both Ainu and most

cultural expression. Ainu were forced to attend

Northwest Coast Indian cultures (Kono, this

segregated schools, were refused access to game

volume), and a host of spiritual and social cus¬

and fish, and could not participate as regular

Ainu were astute as observers of na¬

toms that Ainu share with other native peoples

members of Japanese society.

ture, they did not make representations

of the lower Amur River and eastern Siberia, in¬

of animals, except in certain ritual con¬

cluding shamanism, the feeding of spirits and

texts, until the twentieth century, when

spirit figures, dog sacrifice, use of nipopo (human

Hitchcock and others had predicted, neither did

figurines) and other amulets, and other tradi¬

it grow dramatically,- by today's official count

his naturalistic renditions of bears and
other animals. Although as hunters the

the production of tourist art became
necessary for economic survival.
(Takeki Fujito Collection)

tions. Many of these beliefs are expressed more

the Ainu population has grown by only 10,000

prominently among the Sakhalin Ainu than

since 1 886. During these years many of those

among the Hokkaido Ainu due to the Sakhalin

born to Ainu abandoned their impoverished vil¬

Ainu's closer relations with Asian mainland cul¬

lages and moved to the rapidly growing cities

tures and the Hokkaido Ainu's proximity to

where they attended high schools and universi¬

Honshu. More far-reaching ethnological com¬

ties, took jobs, and melted into the larger Japa¬

parisons between Ainu and Athabascan cultures

nese population. Women married Japanese

have also been made.

men and disguised their Ainu backgrounds in

Because the Ainu have been excluded
from their former northern territories for

the hope that their children would escape the
stigma of discrimination against Ainu that was

much of the past two hundred years, this

prevalent among Japanese in Hokkaido and

northern strain in Ainu culture has weakened

elsewhere in Japan.

and is less obvious today than it was in earlier

24

The results were variable. Although the
Ainu population did not become extinct as

Those who remained Ainu expressed their

times. The Ainu living in Hokkaido also have

ethnicity in different ways. Some maintained Ainu

not been immune to erosion of their former

traditions as subsistence or small-scale farmers,

maritime subsistence and traditions. Losses re¬

hunters, trappers, and fishermen who continued to

sulting from competition with the Japanese for

practice the Ainu religion and customs,- they held

coastal resources and living space have been

periodic bear ceremonies, buried their dead in the

continual since the fifteenth century, such that

Ainu way, and engaged in traditional carving and

by the mid-twentieth century few Hokkaido

weaving for home consumption. But as Hokkaido

Ainu had direct experience with their former

began to fill with Japanese immigrants and cities

life as seal, sea lion, whale, and swordfish hunt¬

began to grow in the late 1800s, economics forced

ers. Today this aspect of their life is known

the Ainu to develop new sources of income. Some

only through Japanese historical sources,

Ainu earned money from harvesting timber

Amu-e, Ainu memory culture, and their oral

(Kayano 1994), while others, began to replicate

history genre known as yukar (Iwasaki-

decorative wood platters or other material-culture

INTRODUCTION / W. FITZHUCH

for secular purposes. New economic and artis¬
tic opportunities were created that eventually
led to the transformation of Ainu art from its
traditional personal and religious base to func¬
tion as commercial and fine art. This remark¬
able story is chronicled here by Chisato
Dubreuil in biographical profiles of Ainu artists
(notably, of Bikky Sunazawa) who pioneered
the breakout of Ainu art from its traditional en¬
cumbrances and from its commercial shackles
as tourist art into the international fine-art
realm (fig. 1.29,- Dubreuil 1995).
Essays in this section also document the
continuing struggles that Ainu have faced during
the past century to maintain their access to tradi¬
tional subsistence resources, lands, and religious
rights. Losses in these areas continued long after
the passage of the 1899 Protection Act, which in
reality denied Ainu the ability to control their
destiny, placing it instead securely in the hands
of Japanese officials. Even as access to lands and
resources diminished throughout the century, an
equally strong force of cultural revitalization ma¬
terialized as Ainu like Shigeru Kayano, among
many others, fought to document, preserve, and
1.29 Ki-men (Woodem Masks)
Abandoning such traditional Ainu sub¬
jects as bears and introducing new
forms—like masks in the series Kimen, which were not part of Ainu tra¬
dition—Bikky Sunazawa explored Ainu
themes and designs in media ranging
from jewelry to monumental wood
sculpture. He was among the first of
the Ainu artists whose work tran¬
scended tourist art, forcing the estab¬
lishment to recognize Ainu fine art.
He also used his art to fight for Ainu
political rights. (HOVO)

items for collectors and the growing numbers of
tourists attracted to Japan's new "wild north,"
whose attractions included the Ainu themselves
(Dubreuil, this volume). As tourist centers in
Asahikawa, Akan, Shiraoi, and elsewhere began to
develop, a new industry and a new trade took form
providing seasonal income for Ainu who carved,
sewed garments, and performed Ainu rituals and
dances for the public, first in their villages for those
visitors interested in truly rustic adventures and
later in prepared sites that advertised Ainu attrac¬
tions and catered especially to tourists (Nomoto,
Ohtsuka, Dubreuil, this volume). By the end of the
twentieth century acting as a "museum" Ainu had
become an established profession and the sales of
Ainu crafts had become an important economic
activity for some families.
Essays in Part VI document changing con¬
ditions in the twentieth century as Ainu re¬
sponded to these new opportunities. On the one
hand, tourism itself demanded a new definition
of Ainu culture as a conscious form of living his¬
tory and culture, but on the other, it was artifi¬
cial and reenacted for the public, with Ainu-ness
marketed as a commodity, a fact that disturbed
many Ainu who preferred to maintain their cul¬
ture in a more private manner.
Art in particular allowed twentieth-century
Ainu to express their beliefs and ethnicity while
producing income. Art also created internal co¬
hesion for Ainu people, just as it had in earlier
periods. As Ainu carvers began to transfer their
skills from persona! objects to mass-produced
tourist art—especially their signature bear
carvings—they laid aside long-held prohibitions
against the representation of animals and people
I / AINU ETHNICITY

teach Ainu language, culture, carving traditions,
dance, yukar, and many other forms of culture to
Ainu, Japanese, and any others who were inter¬
ested (Kayano 1978, 1985, 1987). At times
theirs truly were voices crying out in the wilder¬
ness as political and economic forces aligned
against any and all forms of Ainu expression.

The fight against the Nibutani Dam (Kaizawa,
this volume) was in this sense as crucial an ele¬
ment in cultural survival as efforts to preserve
Ainu language. These efforts and the interna¬
tionalization of the Ainu cause (Dietz, this vol¬
ume) reveal new aspects of the importance of
ethnic identity to cultural survival.
This political struggle has recently met
with some success, as judged by the court's
decision in the Nibutani Dam-construction
case which affirmed the Ainu as the indigenous
people of Hokkaido,- by the passage of the
new law, Ainu Shinpo of 1997,- and the sup¬
port achieved by the Ainu in gaining rec¬
ognition for their native rights in the United
Nations (Tsunemoto, this volume). None of
these achievements would have been possible
without public recognition of Ainu commitment
to their culture and heritage as demonstrated
by political engagement, maintenance of tradi¬
tional rituals and beliefs, a strong work ethic,
and a level of excellence in art and literature.
In the difficult years of the twentieth cen¬
tury strong pressure was brought upon the Ainu
to discontinue their periodic celebration of the
iyomante, or bear-sending ceremony, which was
considered cruel and barbaric to many who did
not understand its central place in the Ainu
worldview. Like Eskimo whaling in northern

25

Alaska or the Northwest Coast Indian potlatch

together with economic competition and loss of

(in which valuable property was given away by

lands and resources, nearly led to the extinction

individuals to members of the opposite clan with

of Ainu culture. By the end of the twentieth

expectation of future reciprocity) which was

century, the Hokkaido Ainu population (about

banned by the Canadian government in the early

25,000) is probably only a fraction of what it was

twentieth century as being "wasteful" and un-Cana-

in the fifteenth century when the Ezo (Ainu) of

dian, the Ainu iyomante was also discouraged by the

Ezogashima (Hokkaido) were a regional economic

Japanese and survived into mid-century only as a

and political power presiding over Hokkaido, the

secretly held family-based ceremony. But as with

Kurile Islands, and southern Sakhalin.

other cultural touchstones, Ainu elders reinstigated

In the end, Ainu ethnicity is what the

the iyomante, and it has once again become an im¬

people themselves make of it, but it is not just

portant focus for the preservation of Ainu tradition.

an internal process, for Ainu ethnicity has also

The ceremony pays respect to elder tradition-bear¬

been shaped by the forces that surround it. Ainu

ers and provides an opportunity for people to ex¬

culture is remarkable as an example of a tradi¬

press their culture through music, dance, and oral

tion that has existed as a recognizable ethnic

presentations. The resurgence of the iyomante

construct for at least eight hundred years. Dur¬

(fig. 1.31) has not only helped revitalize Ainu

ing this period it coalesced and emerged as a

culture it has also brought new understanding to

dominant regional trading power whose advan¬

Japanese society and the world about Ainu atti¬

tage was its control of communication and

tudes toward nature

trade along the margins of the expanding na¬

and the reverence for

tion-states of Manchuria, Russia, and Japan.

life (Fujimura, Utagawa,

During the past four hundred years the Ainu

this volume,- Aiga

have seen their star eclipsed, and many of their

1985). The iyomante ex¬

homelands have been lost to foreign encroach¬

presses the belief that

ment. Just as nautical prowess and trading

life and nature can be

abilities proved crucial in the establishment of

renewed continuously

an Ainu world in the medieval period, Ainu of

as long as there is hu¬

the past two centuries have survived confron¬

man commitment to

tations with competing societies by finding

reciprocity with na¬

strength in other areas. Though they lost ter¬

ture: what is taken

ritories and suffered economic and social

must also be given back

hardship, they did not lose their culture —

in equal measure, and

their Ainu society, customs, beliefs, and mate¬

with reverence.

rial forms. Because their struggles have been
rewarded by survival, they remain a viable

1.31

Ainu Cultural Rebirth

A New Beginning

After centuries of political and cultural

On July I, 1997, the Japanese government for

represssion, Ainu efforts to preserve

the first time gave official recognition to Ainu

their culture and language have stimu¬
lated a cultural rebirth. Ceremonies

culture and language through the passage of the

people with much to teach the world

I

*

*

*

*

T IS A GREAT CHALLENGE and a primary goal of

Ainu Cultural Promotion Law, popularly called

anthropology and art history to document

Ainu Shinpo or "The New Ainu Law." This stat¬

cultural change through time and space and to

being performed and passed on to

ute establishes a new relationship between the

seek to identify the cultural forms, sources of

younger generations. (AMS)

Ainu people and Japan and replaces the Hokkaido

innovation, trends, and traditions that affect the

that were discouraged or banned during
the past one hundred years are now

26

Former Aborigines Protection Act, a 1899 Meiji-

history of cultures. By bringing together a large

government decree that actually promoted eco¬

body of data on the Ainu, this project has pro¬

nomic and political decline and encouraged Ainu

vided a rare opportunity to explore how these

assimilation into Japanese society. The Ainu

processes have influenced the development of a

Shinpo (Dietz, Tsunemoto, this volume) reverses

particular cultural-historical tradition. While

the former policies of the previous Japanese gov¬

this format does not allow an intensive analysis

ernments that controlled Hokkaido and provides

of the diverse sets of data presented here, by

a modicum of funding and official support for the

bringing together a large corpus of information

preservation and promotion of Ainu language and

it may assist future integrative studies of Ainu

culture. It also, for the first time, recognizes the

history, culture, and art. We also hope to have

"indigenous nature" of the Ainu people, but stops

advanced international recognition of the Ainu

short of an explicit statement that the Ainu are

as well as a better understanding of one culture's

"an indigenous people." Whatever the outcome

quest for survival. And we hope to have shown

of the new legislation on the ultimate outcome

that the Ainu—and their ancestors and their

of Ainu culture, its passage reverses centuries of

descendants—have a permanent place among

official and unofficial cultural oppression that,

the peoples of the North Pacific rim.

INTRODUCTION / W FITZHUGH

Historical Sources and Ainu-e

The view of the Ainu as an impoverished

pological approaches, Japanese scholar¬

including A Collection of Ainu-e, which

but mysterious people living as "children

ship is far more complex thematically

presents a pioneering analysis of the

of nature" persisted throughout the early

and reveals a different intellectual

illustrations of the Ainu known as Ainu-e.

part of the twentieth century and left the

tradition, especially regarding the Ainu

These genre illustrations of Ainu subjects

impression that the Ainu were a cultural

language and oral traditions (see H.

have been drawn and painted by Japanese

remnant that one might meet only

Watanabe 1973: 165—70 for a biblio¬

artists over a period of six hundred years

occasionally in the pages of National

graphic review of Ainu studies),- unfortu¬

(Takakura 1973,- T. Sasaki 1993a, b and

Geographic (Hilger 1967). For most of the

nately, iittle of this information is

this volume). Ainu-e are an important

public, knowledge of the Ainu and their

available in English. Among the high¬

source of knowledge, for they include
detailed and often highly accurate

putative Caucasoid links survived only as

lights are works by the following authors:

a brand of anthropological esoterica

Mashiho Chiri, the great Ainu linguist

illustrations of Ainu life, customs, and

encountered in crossword puzzles as "a

and lexicographer,- Shiro Hattori, also a

material culture, including clothing and

northern [or mysterious,- or hairy,- or

linguist and lexicographer,- Kyosuke

implements,- they are especially important

extinct] people of Japan." This view was

Kindaichi, who transcribed Ainu tales

ethnologically because of the detailed

promoted by early travelers, museum

and yukar; Sakuzaemon Kodama, who

descriptions—marginalia added by the

collectors, missionaries, and doctors,

wrote widely on Ainu history and

artists and learned associates—that

primarily in Hokkaido (Bickmore 1868,-

culture,- Mari Kodama, who has recently

accompany the drawings. While Ainu-e

Batchelor 1887 etsecj.; Chamberlain 1887

illuminated Ainu textile art,- and

constitute a visual cultural and historical

etsecf.; Landor 1893,- see Kreiner 1993,

Takamitsu Natori, Ryuzo Torii, Shigeru

"handbook" of Ainu culture, they are not

1996, and this volume). Kurile Ainu and

Kayano, Yoshikazu Ohtsuka, Toshikazu

immune to bias, especially in their

their origins were studied initially by

Sasaki, and many others. Only a few of

distortions of Ainu physical appearance,

Hitchcock (1891a) and Torii (1919).

these scholars have published in English,

which is frequently shown to be bearded,

Anthropological studies of the Ainu began

but we are pleased to include some of

tattooed, and barbaric. These images

in Sakhalin with Bronislaw Pilsudski

them as contributors to this volume.

must be interpreted in relation to

(1906) and were pursued more recently by

For Europeans, the key to Ainu literature

Japanese-Ainu history at the time they

Emiko Ohnuki-Tierney, who has written

is to be found in the voluminous works

were created. The fact that they have

on the resettled Sakhalin Ainu in

of Josef Kreiner who has published

been compiled as Japanese-Ainu relations

Hokkaido (Ohnuki-Tierney 1969 etsecf.').

widely on Ainu culture and history

evolved through various political stages

The most recent anthropological treat¬

(Kreiner 1993, 1996,- Kreiner and

make them both an exciting and

ment of the Hokkaido Ainu in English is

Olschleger 1987).

problematic source. The history of Ainu-e

Hitoshi Watanabe's Ainu Ecosystem (1973),- a

Among Japanese sources, the most

and the challenges they raise for Ainu

more popular anthropological account is

important work for English readers

historiography are explored in this

Sister M. Inez Hilger's Together with the Ainu

interested in Ainu origins and history is

volume by Toshikazu Sasaki.

(1971). All of these works treat the Ainu as

Shini'chiro Takakura's Ainu of Northern

The history of early Ainu research

forest-dwelling hunters, fishermen,

Japan (1960). This work presents the

and collecting has been compiled in two

collectors, and gardeners, and they tend to

history of Ainu-Japanese relations in a

volumes edited by Josef Kreiner. Papers

emphasize anthropological views of a

process-oriented exposition, beginning

in the 1993 volume present data on the

traditional culture rather than the every¬

with the earliest written Japanese records

European image of the Ainu (Kreiner),

day struggle the Ainu faced as they sought

on the Ainu (from the seventh century)

language studies (Voss, Dettmer, and

to maintain their language, religion,

and continuing to modern times. This

Refsing), ethnographic studies (Kato,

traditions, economy, and land. One work

history documents the devastating effects

Majewicz, and Olschleger), Ainu
collections in European museums

that breaks this pattern is Songs of Gods,

that Japanese contact and competition

Songs of Humans (Philippi 1979), which

have had upon the Ainu over more than

(Wilkinson, Teague, Thiele, Warthol,

presents translations of the Ainu epic

one thousand years, the impact of defeat

and Spevakovski), Ainu-e pictures (Sasaki,

poetry known as yukar; this work has a

in wars and rebellions, and the various

Prunner), with appendices on Ainu

long introduction describing Ainu culture

terms that imposed new restrictions on

collections in Japanese, European, and

written by the editor, Donald L. Philippi,

Ainu movement, settlement, economy,

American museums. The 1996 volume

and a preface by poet Gary Snyder. Ainu

and education. Exploitative treatment of

includes essays on the important

history has recently been fully explored by

the Ainu persisted well into the present

museum, archival, and library collec¬

Richard Siddle (1996 and this volume),

century, as seen in the biography of

tions of Philipp Franz and Heinrich von

and its trade and economic relationships

Shigeru Kayano, Our Land Was a Forest

Siebold (Kreiner, Forrer, and others).

by Howell (1994 etsecf. and this volume).

(Kayano 1994).

In contrast to Western research,
which has primarily emphasized anthro¬

I /AINU

Shini'chiro Takakura also wrote fine
works on other aspects of Ainu studies,

ETHNICITY

Finally, Irimoto (1992b) has compiled a
voluminous bibliography of Ainu
literature in all languages.

27

'

1/ Ainu
Origin
Theories
S. A. Arutiunov

EPORTS ABOUT AiNU—OR EZO

to various institutions and places throughout

(Yezo)—people abound in Japan¬

Japan for purposes of educating its people

ese chronicles and semi-mytholo¬

and modernizing its practices, laid the foun¬

gical literature of medieval times.

dation of modern scientific studies concern¬

The question of their origins is never raised in

ing the origins of the Japanese and various

these sources, but they do contain priceless

local populations in Japan. Among the many

data about the Ainu before their contact with

people to be mentioned with gratitude and

Western researchers. Especially valuable are

due respect are Neil G. Munro (1908), Ed¬

sources of the eighteenth and nineteenth

ward Morse (1 879), John Batchelor (1901),

centuries by Tokunai Mogami (1790,- fig. 16.9),

and Erwin E. Baelz (1900), all of whom

Rinzo Mamiya (1855), and Takeshiro Matsuura

greatly contributed to the pioneer studies in

(1851). The earliest reports by Western Euro¬

Japanese prehistory and Ainu cultural and

pean and Russian scholars and voyagers to the

physical anthropology.

area also contain some very detailed and in¬

Baelz was the first to compare the

teresting descriptions,- these individuals include

physical and cultural similarities between

Philipp Franz von Siebold (1832,- fig. 16.3),

Ainu and Ryukyu islanders and to propose

Georg Heinrich von Langsdorff (1812), Adam

a hypothesis that identifies them as vestiges

Johann von Krusenstern (1810-12,- fig. 16.1),

of the original population of Japan prior

Georg Wilhelm Steller (1774), and Stepan P.

to the penetration of ancestors of the mod¬

Krasheninnikov (1776).

ern ethnic Japanese to this archipelago.

Intensive scholarly research on the

Although the ethnic history of Japan seems

1.1 Abashiri Ainu

Romyn Hitchcock took this 1888
photograph of an Ainu group in
Abashiri, a town on the Sea of
Okhotsk in northeastern Hokkaido.
Unlike photos made by many scientists
visiting later who had their subjects
dress in ceremonial robes, Hitchcock
usually showed people in relaxed
groups wearing everyday clothes.
(NAA 98-10383)

origins of various people and tribes of the

to be more complex, Baelz's basic theory of

earth developed only in the second half of the

a dual population structure for Japan is cor¬

nineteenth century and was connected with

roborated by recent research (Hanihara

evolutionist trends in history and anthropol¬

1991,- Kozintsev 1993). On the other hand,

ogy, fostered by similar trends in biology.

Baelz was among the first to interpret the

This interest coincided with both the opening

racial peculiarities of the Ainu population as

of Japan, following the visit of the American

evidence of a certain group of "Caucasian-

Naval Commodore Matthew C. Perry and his

like" (i.e., Europoid) population that alleg¬

fleet to Tokyo in 1853, and with the begin¬

edly preceded the spread of Mongoloid

ning of western anthropology. A deep and

(Asianoid) racial types in East Asia (fig. 1.1).

penetrating curiosity about Japan's history and

<

This thesis of "Caucasianness" of the

traditional cultures resulted, affecting the

Ainu was rather uncritically accepted and

then-fledgling fields of archaeology and

taken for granted by many European and

Ikorikayani, Son of Ikotoi

physical anthropology. These early anthro¬

Japanese scholars. It was, however, rejected

Kakizaki’s work, Portraits of Ezo Chief¬

pologists, as well as missionaries and practical

by scholars of physical anthropology in

tains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

advisors invited by the Japanese government

Russia who instead preferred to believe in

1843 copy by Teiki Kojima after Hakyo

1/ ORIGIN THEORIES

29

the Australoid affiliation of the Ainu physical

All Soviet physical anthropologists of

type and in their southern origins, supposedly

the first half of the twentieth century who

from somewhere in southern China, Indo¬

had a chance to study living Ainu or cranio-

china, and Austronesia. The ideas of a south¬

Iogical collections (Trofimova 1932,- Debets

ern origin of the Ainu race were first postu¬

1935, 195 1, Cheboksarov 1947, 1951,-and

lated by L. Vivien de Saint-Martin (1872) and

Levin 1958) rejected the thesis of their

soon gamed wide acceptance among Russian

Europoidness and basically followed the view

anthropologists who studied mainly skeletal

taken by A. 1. Tarenetzky and Shternberg.

collections in museums (Anuchin 1876,-

The idea of the Europoidness (Caucasoidness)

Tarenetzky 1890). Later on, one of the lead¬

of the Ainu continued to prevail in Western

ing authorities in early Soviet anthropology,

scholarship for some time and was strongly

Leo Shternberg, who as a revolutionary exile

influenced and supported by George Montan-

had worked among Nivkhi (formerly known

don (1927, 1937), for whom, as he stated, this

as Gilyak) and Ainu groups of Sakhalin in the

Europoidness was "de clarte'de soleil," that is, as

early 1900s, added much new data on reli¬

clear as the light of day. The reasons for such

gion, material culture, and Amu art, which in

a declarative statement were, however, rather

his opinion corroborated the theory of their

insufficient. Montandon based his opinion

southern origins (Shternberg 1933).

mostly on such features as the form and de¬

More or less simultaneously with

velopment of hair, the form of nose and eyes,

Shternberg, important contributions to Ainu

eye color, etc. Dental features, genetic mark¬

studies were made by a number of Polish schol¬

ers, blood-group factors, nonmetric cranial
characteristics—all of which place the Ainu

1.2 Ainu Men of Sakhalin

definitely outside the limits of the Europoid

Physical and economic differences are
evident between the Abashiri group and

physical type — were not yet sufficiently

these wealthy Sakhalin Ainu traders

known in Montandon's time.

photographed by Bronislaw Pilsudski

In the twentieth century the greatest

between 1902 and 1905. Sakhalin

contribution to Ainu studies was made by

formal garments differ from Hokkaido

Japanese scholars who emphasized collecting

styles, and the men, who still wear
beards, have Mongoloid features.

extant ethnographic and linguistic data, which

(NAA 98-10361)

were in danger of disappearing—a danger
that has become a tragic reality. Luckily,
Japanese scholars succeeded in gathering an
enormous amount of data, which documented
the Ainu cultural and linguistic legacy down
to minute details. As the most important
contributors one must mention Shin'ichiro
Takakura (1940, 1947, 1949, 1960), Sadaka
Nishizuru (1942), Kyosuke Kindaichi (1943,
1961), Yuko Yamamoto (1943, 1944), Genzo
Sarashina (1955, 1968), Hiromichi Kono
(1958), Motosuke Ishikawa (1962), Hitoshi
Watanabe (1973), and many others. There
have also been native Ainu contributors, such
ars like Izydor Kopernicki (1 882), I Radlinski

as the outstanding linguist Mashiho Chiri

(1892), B. Dybowski (1902), and Bronislaw

(1942, 1953-62, 1957), and the most impor¬

Pilsudski (1912,- fig. 1.2). Among Russian

tant modern Ainu author who has written

scholars, perhaps only M. M. Dobrotvorskii,

about the history and culture of his native

who worked among the Ainu of Sakhalin and

people, Shigeru Kayano (1994).

published many valuable materials on their eth¬

30

The aspect of Ainu origins most vividly

nography and language, did not share ideas ei¬

discussed by Japanese anthropologists was the

ther of Europoidness or Australoidness of the

Jomon-Ainu relationship. The question was

Ainu,- he held that their physical features are not

whether the Neolithic people of the Jornon

strikingly different from their neighbors and con¬

culture, known through archaeological re¬

cluded that the Ainu could be included in the

search, should be considered direct ancestors

Mongoloid race, a viewpoint that has largely

of modern Ainu while being only marginally

been corroborated (Dobrotvorskii 1873, 1875).

important to the formation of the modern

ANCIENT ROOTS/S. A. ARUTIUNOV

ethnic Japanese physical type (Wajin) or

modern Japanese are, to the contrary, basi¬

whether the Jomon people are to be placed

cally descendants of various continental

among the most important ancestors of mod¬

Mongoloid migrants, although they also

ern Japanese but not the Ainu.

possess about 10 to 20 percent of genes

The development of dental studies shed
new light on these discussions. In particular,

inherited from the Jomon people.
The Jomon people were Australoid

Christy Turner II has demonstrated that the

not in the sense that they had migrated to

teeth of Jomon people, as well as those of the

Japan from somewhere in Indochina or

Ainu, belong to an archaic type labeled by

Indonesia, let alone Australia, but in the

Turner as Sundadontic, whereas the teeth of

sense that they, like some "Australoid" tribes

modern Japanese (and many other modern

of India, were extant representatives of

populations of Eastern Asia) belong to a type

those archaic, undifferentiated proto-

of a more recent formation labeled Sinodontic

Australoid types from which all more-spe¬

(Turner 1976,- Kozintsev 1993,- Ishida, this

cialized racial types, including Africanoids

volume) Introduction of dental material into the

and Europoids, gradually developed on

scope of the discussion was especially impor¬

different continents. In other words, the

tant because, as many physical anthropologists

Jomon people were related to and re¬

(Cheboksarov 1951) have noted, there is no

sembled those remote ancestors of the Asian

single craniological trait (with the possible

Mongoloids who had not yet developed

exception of eye orbital height) that would

specific Mongoloid features. This point of

allow one to distinguish precisely between

view basically agrees with Tatyana

Ainu skulls and eastern and southeastern Mon¬

Trofimova (1932). According to Kozintsev

goloid skulls, in spite of the obvious difference

(1993), Ainu are extant Upper Paleolithic

in appearance that can be observed among the

Australoid ancestors of recent Mongoloids.

living populations. Therefore, all previous

Essentially similar views have been ex¬

arguments and comparisons, which were based

pressed by several Japanese authors, such as

exclusively on cranial features without examin¬

Bin Yamaguchi (1967) and Keiichi Omoto

ing the dentition, remained indecisive.

and Shogo Misawa (1976).

There is still not total agreement among
anthropologists concerning the problem

Based on the current theory of Ainu
origins, it is no longer necessary to search

of Ainu origins, but a more or less prevailing

for a proto-Ainu homeland in the remote

point of view was formulated recently by

south, either in Indochina or even further

Alexander Kozintsev (1993). According to

south. The continental ancestors of the

Yamaguchi's and Hanihara's views and in

Jomon people might have lived anywhere

accordance with Baelz's previous findings,

in southern or eastern China and/or the

Ainu and Ryukyuans represent more-or-less

Amur River area as well The later genetic

direct descendants of the Jomon populations,

and cultural influences from the Russian

although during the last two or three millen¬

Far East Maritime/Amur/Manchuria region

nia both have experienced continental Mon¬

to northern Jomon peoples and the Ainu

goloid admixtures, more clearly visible

occurred for the most part shortly before

among Ryukyuans than among Ainu. Any

or soon after the time of Christ. These influ¬

Caucasoid resemblances of Ainu or

ences have been documented beyond any

Ryukyuans are to be considered accidental

doubt (Kiyono 1955,- Oba 1955, 1956,-

or, rather, ascending to a proto-Australoid

Chubarova 1957,- Levin 1958,- Kozyreva

heritage common to all humankind. The

1967,- and Befu and Chard 1964).

1/ ORIGIN THEORIES

31

A

lthough there are different

opinions on the origin of the
Ainu, archaeological research
confirms that they represent the

Ainu
Homelands:

end of a long chain of aboriginal settlement

Natural History

Japanese archipelago has come to the atten¬

that began more than 20,000 years ago during
the last and coldest phase of the Ice Age.

Modern Times
Yugo Ono

2.2

Sea-Level History

This graph shows fluctuations in sea level for the past

tion of Japanese archaeologists only during

from Ice Age to

Tens of thousands of years

Knowledge of a Paleolithic occupation of the

140,000 years. Sea level rose rapidly as the global cli¬

the past few decades, when research acceler¬

mate warmed, and then fell for 100,000 years, only to

ated rapidly because of an increase in salvage

rise again during the last ten millennia. Hatching de¬

excavations resulting from development

notes period of Hokkaido-Sakhalin land bridge.

projects. The discovery that Japan had a
lengthy Paleolithic settlement has also stimu¬
lated new interest in the early environments
of these Late Ice Age hunters. As a result we
have learned much about the evolution of
landforms, changing climate and its influ¬
ence on vegetation, effects of lowered and
rising sea levels on adjacent seas and on the
Japanese islands, and animal extinctions and
introductions—to say nothing of the many
ecological changes that occurred during
the Holocene, the post-glacial period from
10,000 years ago to the present, when

This essay provides a brief description
of the early landscapes and environments of
Japan, focusing on its natural history as the
context for the earliest human settlement in
this region. We examine the natural history
of Hokkaido, the northeastern island of the
Japanese archipelago, where Ainu people live
today, as well as the northern part of Honshu,
where they may have lived in the past, to
reveal why human-environmental interactions
are crucial to understanding Japan's paleoenvironments and the changing role of humans as
"ecological actors" through time.

human activities increasingly affected environmental change.

Ice Ages and Paleolithic Japan

°E
2.1

Archaeological remains of settlements that are

Ice-Age East Asia

and Today

more than 20,000 years old have been found

Permafrost was more ex¬

in Hokkaido, providing evidence of a popula¬

tensive than continental

tion that survived the coldest phase of the

glaciation in eastern Asia

late glacial period. These people made various

because lack of moisture
sources kept snow and ice

kinds of hunting and processing tools from

from forming ice sheets

obsidian, which was easily accessible from the

that insulated the earth.

volcanic regions of eastern Hokkaido. Their

This map illustrates the

culture is known as Shiritaki, named for the

extent of permafrost in the

modern village where the best-quality obsid¬

Late Glacial Maximum (ca.

ian is found.

18,000 years ago) and

By the end of the glacial period, about

today. Late Glacial and
modern shorelines are

10,000 years ago, Shiritaki Paleolithic was

also shown.

replaced by a Mesolithic culture with similari¬

100°S

ties to cultures of the Lake Baikal region in
southern Siberia. Their small "microlithic"
tool industry was based on a new method of

1-5 Present permafrost distribution
1. continuous

producing blades from small cores, and from

2. southern limit of discontinu¬
ous permafrost

these bladelets a wide variety of tools were

3. southern limit of sporadic

made, including many believed to have been

permafrost
4. southern limit of 50cm-

used for arming arrows for hunting large ani¬

deep seasonal frost
5. southern limit of seasonal

mals like deer and mammoth.

frost

These Paleolithic and Mesolithic

6-8 Permafrost distribution in the
Late Glacial Maximum
6. southern limit of continuous
permafrost
7. southern limit of discontinu¬

glacial maximum
shoreline

present
shoreline

tion with the Ainu, unlike the pottery-making
120°E

140°E

ous permafrost
8. extent of alpine permafrost

Neolithic Jomon culture. The Jomon culture
is known either as Epi-jomon (reflecting its

9. Present soil wed6e

32

peoples seem to have had no direct connec¬

modified form) or Zoku-Jomon in Hokkaido
ANCIENT ROOTS / Y. ONO

("Zoku" means northern), where it persisted
until about 2,000 years ago. It was replaced
in southern Hokkaido by Satsumon culture
and in the north by the Okhotsk culture.
Jomon culture spread widely throughout the
Japanese islands in the warmer period that
followed the melting of glacial ice. Although
the origin of Jomon culture has never been
clear, it probably originated from regional
variants of the earlier Paleolithic and Meso¬
lithic cultures, because regional varieties
of Jomon are known throughout Japan.
In Honshu and the southern islands, Yayoi
culture replaced Jomon about 2,000 years ago
and led to the formation of the Japanese state
during the first millennium A.D. Yayoi did not
penetrate Hokkaido mainly because its severe
climate did not permit rice cultivation, the
2.3

economic base of this culture. Ainu culture

Bathymetry of Soya Strait

Shallow waters in Soya Strait ensured a land connection between

seems to have originated from the earlier

Sakhalin and Hokkaido for much of the last Ice Age.

Jomon and Epi-Jomon cultures whose peoples
had developed special adaptations to the
natural resources of the Hokkaido environ¬
ment and persisted in this essentially nonagricultural tradition, with only limited growth of
garden farming, until the nineteenth century.
45°N

The Northern Ice-Age Land Bridge
The Hokkaido Ice Age was characterized by
major changes in coastline and natural envi¬
ronments. Figure 2.1 illustrates the coastline
of the entire Japanese islands and eastern
Asia at the Late Glacial Maximum about
40

1 8,000 years ago,- at that time, most of
northern North America was covered by a
continental-scale glacier called the
Laurentide Ice Sheet whose surface and ice
volume were approximately the same as the
present Antarctic Ice Sheet. Northern Europe,

35o England, and Ireland were also covered by a
similar ice sheet, and the total volume of ice on
earth was three times larger than at present.
Because the water on earth circulates in a
closed system in which there is no new source
inside or outside the earth and no water leaves
the system, the volume of seawater decreases
30° enormously when a large ice sheet builds up on
land. Most of the water that evaporates from
the sea falls on land as snow, where it contrib¬
utes to glaciers and ice sheets. Because glaciers
and ice sheets flow extremely slowly compared
with rivers, water on the land cannot reach the
2.4

Late Glacial Fauna

Ice-Age Japan had many cold-adapted mammals. Throughout
much of this time Japan was a peninsula of Asia, and the Sea of

sea for long periods of time, and the volume of
seawater thus decreases, causing a remarkable

Japan was connected to the Pacific Ocean at Korea Strait. (Ono

change in sea levels throughout the world (fig.

and Igarashi 1992)

2.2). The sea level was decreased by at least

2/AINU

HOMELANDS

33

340 feet (100 meters) during the Late Glacial

Honshu and Hokkaido is very deep, exceed¬

Maximum, effecting great changes to the

ing 435 feet (1 30 meters), so a land bridge

coastline of the Japanese archipelago (fig. 2.1).

would not be created there even when Ice

The most significant change occurred in

Age sea levels reached their lowest point.

Hokkaido, which was completely connected

This geographical situation gave Hokkaido

to the Asian continent by a land bridge or a

a different geographical orientation during

relatively narrow strip of land that emerged

the Ice Age: it was a peninsula of the Asian

from the sea during this period of lowered

continent for a much longer time than it was

sea level (Ono 1991). During the same period

an island, as today.

that Hokkaido was connected to the Asian

These conditions have contributed to

continent via the island of Sakhalin by two

similarities between the fauna and flora of

land bridges—at the Soya Strait and the

Hokkaido and the Asian continent on the one

Marniya Strait—the Bering Land Bridge, one

hand and on the other, to differences between

of the largest land bridges of the Ice Age,

biota in Honshu and Hokkaido. Biogeograph-

connected Asia and North America at the

ically, the Tsugaru Strait corresponds to a

northwestern edge of present-day Alaska.
A bathymetric map of the Soya Strait

2.5

Present Vegetation Zones

of North and East Asia

(after Ono and Igarashi 1992)

remarkable boundary, the Blakiston Line,
which separates northern fauna from southern

(fig. 2.3) illustrates that the land bridge here

fauna (fig. 2.4). Many species of fauna that

appears when the sea level is 150 feet (forty-

once lived or are still living in Hokkaido

five meters) lower than its present level. The

cannot be found in Honshu, whereas fossils

Marniya Strait, separating Sakhalin from the

of mammoth and northern types of deer are

Asian continent, is very shallow—less than

found only in Hokkaido.

thirty-two feet (ten meters) deep—thus the

The corresponding boundary for flora

Sakhalin land bridge emerges with a relatively

lies in the middle of Sakhalin, where a north¬

Glacial Maximum (18,000 Years Ago)

small reduction of current sea levels. On the

ern conifer forest (taiga) that exists throughout

(after Ono and Igarashi 1992)

other hand, the Tsugaru Strait between

Siberia is replaced by a mixed forest that char-

34

ANCIENT ROOTS / Y. ONO

2.6

Phytogeography of Japan at Late

acterizes the flora of Hokkaido (fig. 2.5). This

water, seeds transported into Hokkaido may

vegetation boundary, called the Schmidt Line,

have depended on birds and humans. Findings

migrated southward during the Late Glacial

of beech seeds in the food remains at Jomon

Maximum to the middle or southern part of

sites seem to support this possibility. Although

Hokkaido, and Siberian larch (Larix tpndini)

no boats have yet been found in Jomon sites

mixed with the more southern Alpine pine

in Hokkaido, humans were certainly moving

(Pinas pumila) to produce a taiga forest (fig. 2.6).

between Honshu and Hokkaido by 8,000
years ago, and beech seeds would have been

The Ice Age-Hoiocene Change

traveling in their stomachs and in the guts

When the late glacial period of the Ice Age

of birds.

ended about 10,000 years ago, the natural

The Early and Middle Jomon periods

environment of Hokkaido changed quickly.

(ca. 5,000-6,000 years ago) correspond to

The Ice Age taiga forest and forest tundra

the so-called Holocene "climatic optimum."

disappeared and were replaced by a mixed

The climate by this time had become the

forest in the island's lowlands. A pollen dia¬

warmest of the postglacial era, and sea levels

gram that indicates the percentage of differ¬

rose to their maximum. Recent finds from

ent tree species living in lowland northern

large archaeological sites on both sides of

Hokkaido (fig. 2.7) shows these dramatic

the Tsugaru Strait—Sannai-Maruyama in

environmental changes. The diagram clearly

Aomori Prefecture on the Honshu side and

records the replacement of the northern taiga

Nakano-B and Ofuna-C sites near Hakodate

forest by the mixed forest between the Ice

in southern Hokkaido—suggest a much

Age and the Holocene, that is, between 8,000

more active cultural interaction between the

and 10,000 years ago. The Siberian larch

two locations during this warm climatic

forest completely disappeared from Hokkaido

period. Although a direct link between these

about 8,000 years ago, and the tundra vegeta¬

Jomon people and the Ainu has never been
proven, the natural environments in which
their cultures developed show many similari¬

•o

_

#

<c

<A ■$ cf

#

aT

^

AT

So

^^ #
^ cf

S*

„o°
&

ties. This, along with genetic and other

So

.<A ^
<C®

Age BP.

similarities proven by physical anthropologi¬
cal studies, seems to indicate the intimate
relationship between the Ainu and the first
jomon peoples who lived in Hokkaido.

The Natural History of the
Hokkaido Jomon and Ainu Peoples
Even though Ainu appeared later than the
Jomon and differ from them in many respects,
the habitats in which they thrived show
remarkable similarities. These are due to the
fact that their natural environments during
the Holocene were basically the same, al¬
though obviously some physical and cli¬
0

80%

B

siit

ES peat

H clay

I—I sand

volcanic ash

matic changes occurred over time.
Two very basic elements were most

tion survived only on higher mountains such as

important for the lifestyles of the Jomon and

This diagram shows changes in the

Mount Taisetsu in central Hokkaido. In south¬

Ainu people in Hokkaido: the broadleaf

vegetation of the Furano basin in

ern Hokkaido, a cool-temperate deciduous

forest (including a cool-temperate beech

2.7

Vegetation History

central Hokkaido for the last 32,000
years. The end of the Ice Age and
beginning of the warmer Holocene
is indicated by the decline in tundra

forest dominated by beech (Facjus) spread north

forest in southern Hokkaido and a mixed

from its Ice Age refugium in Honshu.

deciduous forest in other parts) and rivers.

Although the climatic change from the

The broadleaf forest provided not only beech
seeds but also oak acorns, both crucial foods

species and rise of forest shrubs and

cold Ice Age to the warm Holocene began

trees, (after Ono and Igarashi 1992)

more than 10,000 years ago, the arrival of the

for Jomon and Ainu people. Recent excava¬

first beech forest in Hokkaido was retarded:

tions at Sannai-Maruyama and Ofuna-C

sea levels had risen, and the Tsugaru Strait

suggest that early-to-middle-period Jomon

between Honshu and Hokkaido became wider.

people had already planted chestnut trees

Because beech seeds are not tolerant of sea¬

(Castanea) near their villages in order to

2/ AINU

HOMELANDS

35

which returned in the fall: salmon provided
not only food but also materials for boots and
clothing (fig. 2.9). These fish were (and are
still) considered to be the most precious gift of
the gods, and even today the Ainu celebrate
their appearance and capture them with
elaborate ritual in their "First Salmon" cer¬
emonies (Roche and Fdutchinson 1998),
although now they must procure a special
license in advance to do so. The intimate link
between the Ainu and rivers is shown clearly
by the abundance of place-names that they
have given to river locations: even small
tributaries are named, and every bank and
cliff that has any relevance to their lives is
recognized with an Ainu word. Although
harvest their nuts. Acorns were also an im¬

mountains are important to the Ainu—they

The bear, which the Ainu revered as god

portant source of food for various forms of

penetrate deeply into this realm for trapping

of the mountains (kimun-kamuy), pro¬

wildlife, especially the brown bear, one of the

and hunting deer, bear, and other animals—

most important animal resources for the Ainu.

they never gave names to the mountains

According to the animistic beliefs of the

themselves but rather named them after the

bear with ritual and ceremony. This bear¬

Ainu, the brown bear spirit is the most impor¬

rivers that originated there.

skin pouch holds a hunter’s flint, steel,

tant god in their cosmology, and many ritual

and tinder, as well as tobacco, used for

ceremonies have been developed related to

2.8

Hunter’s Bearskin Pouch

vided the Ainu with food and necessary
materials for life. To thank it for providing
these resources, people honored the

kamuy-nomt—prayers to the gods. It

2.9

Salmon and Ainu Today

Salmon was a principal food resource
for many Ainu, and its skin was used
for waterproof boots and other articles.
Beginning in the late nineteenth cen¬

it is located farther south (42 to 45 degrees north

hunting this animal (fig. 2.8). Broadleaf

latitude) than Alaska or Canada. It receives

forests also supply many kinds of vegetable

heavy snows because of a winter monsoon wind

foods used by the Ainu from spring through

that blows from Siberia and draws humidity as

fall, such as the roots of wild lilies, rhubarb,

it passes over the Sea of Japan and the Sea of

berries, and mushrooms. The Ainu make use

Okhotsk, which lies along the northern coast

of nearly all kinds of trees as materials for

of FJokkaido and freezes in winter.

was collected in Okotsonai, Hokkaido,
by Hiram Hiller in 1901. (UPM A454)

Fdokkaido has harsh winters even though

housing, boats, and clothing, and many kinds

Basic winter nourishment for the Ainu

tury, the Ainu were prohibited from

of medicines were prepared from the trees,

was provided by salmon, which return to the

catching salmon; that right was given

herbs, and animals of the broadleaf-forest

rivers in the fall, and the brown bear, which

to Japanese commercial fishermen.

zone. This forest was, in essence, the central

hibernates, making it easy to capture. Migrat¬

Even today Ainu must obtain special

life-support system for the Ainu.

ing herds of deer also provided winter food

permission to catch fish needed for
their annual first-salmon ceremony.

The Ainu have traditionally been people

(fig. 2.10). Hunting and fishing, together

of the rivers: their settlements are always

with the collection of a wide range of vegeta¬

many political issues dividing the Ainu

placed along waterways, and river products

tive foods from the broadleaf forest, enabled

and the Japanese government.

once provided much food and many other

the Ainu to utilize Hokkaido's natural envi¬

materials central to Ainu life. Probably the

ronment and maintain their unique culture

most important of river resources were salmon,

and lifestyle. In modern times, the brown bear

Traditional fishing rights are one of

population has continued to decline as a re¬
sult of the loss and fragmentation of forests
due to logging and agriculture.

The Destruction of Hokkaido's
Natural Resources
Two maps (figs. 2.1 la, b) clearly illustrate
changes to Hokkaido that have occurred
since the arrival of outsiders from Honshu
after the Meiji Restoration. Although the
colonization of Ezo (Hokkaido's former
name) was attempted by the shogunate in the
Edo period (1615-1868), systematic develop¬
ment began only after the Meiji Restoration,these works have included agricultural devel-

36

ANCIENT ROOTS / Y. ONO

2.10

Chief Noshikosa of Shamokotan

Together with salmon and other fish,
deer was an important subsistence
resource for Ainu people nearly
everywhere in Hokkaido. In Sakhalin,
reindeer was the principal quarry.
Deer-hunting was a common theme for

Ainu-e painters; this painting of an
Ainu chieftain with his quarry by Teiki
Kojima is a 1843 copy after Hakyo
Kakizaki's series Portraits of Ezo

Chieftains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

opment, intensive lumbering, and fishing

Japanese officials, and the Ainu were ex¬

offshore along the Hokkaido coast. Within

cluded from salmon fishing—even though

a century, most of the broadleaf-forest cover

the official government policy held that Ainu

has disappeared from the island. Wetlands

were "Japanese"—until the passage of the

along the rivers have been filled or dried to

new law, or Ainu Shinpo, in 1997 (Roche

expand the agricultural landbase. Rivers have

and Hutchinson 1998,- Kaizawa, Sasamura,

been straightened and their banks cemented

this volume). A highly symbolic infringe¬

to protect new rice fields along the lowlands

ment on the Ainu ecosystem involved the

from erosion and flooding. These river works,

construction of a major dam on the Saru

which include the construction of dams

River at Niputani in the early 1990s. Two

and embankments, completely changed the

Ainu leaders—Shigeru Kayano, who later

ecology of the rivers on which the Ainu have

became a member of the National Diet, and

built their economy, life, and culture.

Tadashi Kaizawa—filed a lawsuit opposing

Salmon still ascend the rivers, but many

the construction of this dam in their home

cannot reach their spawning grounds because

village, for the dam not only prevents

of dams. The salmon catch is conducted by

salmon from swimming upstream but has

2/ AINU

HOMELANDS

37

also destroyed the site of salmon ceremo¬
nies. The case was under consideration in
the courts for a long time, and eventually the
Ainu won, but by then it was too late be¬
cause the dam had already been constructed.
Another instance of the continued
environmental destruction of the Ainu
homeland involves the kingfisher owl (Bubo
blakistoni; fig. 2.12). This existence of this
owl, the largest in Japan, has become en¬
dangered by channeling projects and agri¬
cultural development along the rivers (Ono
1997). Because the owl's habitat is restricted
to riparian forests, where they primarily eat
fish from rivers, the cutting of trees and
catching of large numbers of salmon (to ob¬
tain fish for artificial breeding purposes) have
threatened their survival. The owl's circum¬
2.12

2.12

stances offer an ironic parallel to the plight of
Kingfisher Owl,

2.11 a, b

Land-use Change

the Ainu themselves, who effectively lost

from WIeui Period to Present

their way of life when their right to catch

The kingfisher owi is important to the

One hundred years of industrial-scale devel¬

salmon was prohibited by the Japanese gov¬

Ainu, and like bears, salmon, and many

opment, especially in forestry and agricul¬

ernment. The rapidly disappearing kingfisher

other animals, it is featured in ritual

ture, have brought major changes to

owl is an Ainu god: it guards the village (kotan),

and ceremony. Modern development

Hokkaido’s natural forest ecosystem. De¬

practices threaten its habitat, and Ainu

struction of the broadleaf forest, construc¬

have asked for regulations to protect this

tion of dams, and channelization of rivers

and other species endangered by

threatens the livelihood of not only the Ainu

Hokkaido's rapid and ecologically harm¬

but of the huge Japanese population that

ful development program.

now resides in Hokkaido.

Guardian of the Village

2.11a

38

2.11b

ANCIENT ROOTS / Y. ONO

and its decline may be read as a parable of
recent Ainu history.

W
Prehistoric
Hokkaido
and Ainu
Origins
Kiyoshi Yamaura and
Hiroshi Ushiro

3.1

Duck-Effigy Flute (replica)

This ceramic figurine was found at
Bibi-4 site, Chitose, Hokkaido, and
dates from the Final Jomon period
(1,000 b.c.). Most Japanese archae¬

HERE DID THE AlNU PEOPLE

a few researchers are working in these areas

come from and how was

today and their excavations are for the most

their culture established?

part small-scale efforts, archaeological infor¬

Scholars in linguistics, eth¬

mation is still quite limited.

nology, history, biological anthropology, and

Examining the prehistoric cultures of

archaeology have tried to answer these ques¬

Hokkaido beginning with the oldest stage,

tions for many years and have made major

with a focus on the emerging phases of each

advances. Because the Ainu did not have writ¬

era and culture, provides a clearer under¬

ten language, archaeological studies play a

standing of both the independent origins

crucial role in explaining their origins. This

and development of prehistory in Hokkaido

essay explores Ainu origins and antecedents

(Amino 1990,- Nihon Kokogaku Kyokai

largely based on evidence from Hokkaido,

1994) and its close relationship with sur¬

which is the homeland of the largest Ainu

rounding regions (figs. 3.1, 3.2).

population and seems to have been central to
its evolution in prehistory (H. Okada 1998;

Paleolithic Cultures

Utagawa 1980a, b; Yamaura 1998).

The Paleolithic or "Old Stone Culture" dates

Archaeological surveys in Hokkaido

to the Ice Age, which ended about 14,000

have been conducted for nearly one hundred

years ago. Global temperatures cooled, the

years. In the beginning, it was a small-scale

sea level dropped more than 300 feet (100

effort, but after the 1970s larger surveys and

meters) below todays oceans,- and Hokkaido

excavations were required to mitigate infra¬

was connected to the Eurasian continent by a

structure developments, including road con¬

land bridge across Sakhalin It is also possible

struction, house-building, dams, coastal engi¬

that the Korean peninsula and the present-

neering, and airport growth. The number

day islands of Kyushu and Honshu were con¬

(seventy-nine) and total area (about thirty-

nected to the Asian mainland (fig. 2.1).

one square miles, or 50,000 square meters) of

Hokkaido was covered by tundra, and mam¬

ologists interpret this ceramic effigy

these excavations in 1997 alone make public

moths, moose, elk, and probably reindeer

as a duck in flight, but it is clearly not

archaeology in Hokkaido one of the most

migrated to Japan over the Sakhalin land mass.

exactly a duck but rather some kind
of transformational spirit (duck/sea
otter?) whose form is not fixed in na¬

extensive such programs in the world.
In order to clarify the origin of the Ainu

It is assumed that humans moved to
Hokkaido as hunters who followed the

and their prehistoric culture it is also neces¬

movements of these animals into this newly

holes in its bottom, chest, and lower

sary to study areas surrounding Hokkaido.

accessible territory, but to date there has

body make it useless as a normal

The history of archaeological study in Sakha¬

been no clear consensus about when such a

vessel, but it could have been used

lin, the lower Amur River region, northeast¬

movement occurred. The oldest archaeo¬

ture. Nor is its function understood:

as a kind of flute. It is covered with

ern China, eastern Siberia, the Kurile Islands,

logical sites in Japan date to about 50,000

Kamchatka, and the northern coast of the Sea

years ago and have been found near Sendai

vessel openings. (HMH: Japanese

of Okhotsk also dates back almost one hun¬

in northern Honshu and in Tokyo. Al¬

National Important Cultural Property)

dred years, as in Hokkaido. But because only

though sites of this age have not yet been

Jomon designs and has red ocher
pigment around the eyes, mouth, and

3/ PREHISTORIC HOKKAIDO

39

discovered in Hokkaido, they probably will be

phase of the Ice Age. 1 hese skills allowed

found in the future, because Hokkaido may

them to cross the Bering land bridge and

have been the only land passage between the

colonize Alaska quickly when conditions

Asian mainland and Honshu at that time.

began to improve 15,000 years ago.

At present the earliest Paleolithic sites

3.4

Ceramic Vessel

The Japanese ceramic tradition is
among the earliest in the world, having
begun as early as 10,000 to 12,000
years ago. This conical vessel with its

in Hokkaido (fig. 3.3) belong to the Hok¬

Jomon Culture

kaido Microlithic ("small tool") culture and

Archaeologists throughout the world see the

date to about 20,000 years ago. Several hun¬

emergence of pottery as an important mile¬

dred such sites are known, and many are also

stone in cultural development. Whether a

present in other islands of Japan. Microlithic

culture had ceramics was a major criterion that

technology spread into Japan from Siberia

scholars used in the nineteenth century to

and northern China. It appears that the old¬

separate the Paleolithic and Neolithic ages. On

est Microlithic culture sites are in the region

the islands of Japan, ceramics appeared during

between Lake Baikal in Siberia and northeast¬

the transition from the Pleistocene to the

ern China (H. Kimura 1997). After originat¬

Holocene epoch, 10,000 to 12,000 years ago,

ing in these areas, Microlithic culture spread

and is the hallmark of Jomon culture fig. 3.3),

south into Hokkaido from Sakhalin and into

whose sites are found throughout Hokkaido

scalloped, shell-impressed rim is one

Honshu and Kyushu from the Korean penin¬

and Honshu (Chiyo 1984a, b). Jomon's exist¬

of two Incipient Jomon (6,000 b.c.) pot¬

sula. The fact that Microlithic culture existed

ence in Japan for almost 10,000 years makes it

tery types that are found in different

across vast areas of Northeast Asia, including

one of the longest-running single cultural

regions of Hokkaido, which suggests

Siberia and Japan, shows that these early

traditions in the world, whose hunting-and-

people had excellent hunting skills and were

gathering economy was so well adapted to

It was found at Narukawa, Narukawa-

adapted to a variety of northern forest, tun¬

the environmental conditions that few eco¬

cho. Hokkaido. (HMH)

dra, and coastal conditions during the coldest

nomic disruptions seem to have occurred.

that cultural differences already existed
among the island's Jomon population.

3.2

Archaeological Cultures of Hokkaido

AMD SURROUNDING REGIONS
3.3

Geological Stratigraphy and Culture

Periods of the Misawa River Region in
Chitose and Tomakomai Regions (HACRIC)

Honshu
Present

Hokkaido-Sakhalin

«=
Historic
Period

HISTORIC
AINU

A.D.1200
YAMATO
A.D. 700

Japanese state
formation

A.D. 600

KOFUN
state formation

A.D.250

hunting
gathering
fishing

YAYOI
agriculture

250 B.C.

5,000 B.C.

EPI-JOMON

F

Final
Late
Middle
Early
Initial

JOMON

m

hunting
gathering
fishing

i

E

Incipient

Incipient

10,000 B.C.
PALEOLITHIC
hunting-gathering-fishing
30,000 B.C.
40

ANCIENT ROOTS/K YAMAURA AND

H

USHIRO

continued gathering wild foods, hunted large
game, and caught salmon, ocean fish, and sea
mammals as in the Paleolithic (fig. 3.5), but
their way of living changed significantly.
Their more settled village life made it pos¬
sible to utilize pottery, and pithouses quickly
replaced the briefly occupied hunting camps
of Paleolithic times. Through time, these
pithouse villages grew larger and cemeteries
appeared (Watanabe 1990a). By Late Jomon,
circular cemeteries 100 to 300 feet (30 to 40
meters) in diameter surrounded by ten-foothigh earthen embankments were being used.
Evidence of social stratification also appears,
indicated by groups of individuals buried
with elaborate grave goods found around the
edge and outside the embankment, whereas
those in the central locations had more
simple interments.
Although Jomon people utilized a
hunter-gatherer economy like that of their
Paleolithic predecessors, their subsistence
activities diversified and became more re¬
3.5

Killer Whale (replica)

The Ainu know the killer whale (orca)
as the god of the sea (repun-kamuy).
In the past orcas were both feared

Jomon development is most easily traced

gionally focused. Brown bears and deer took

through stylistic changes in its ceramic tradi¬

the place of Ice Age animals that had be¬

tion, which produced, at various stages, highly

come extinct,- hunting of fur seals, sea lions,

flamboyant and distinctive pottery types.

and common seals with toggling harpoons

and revered as the most powerful
predators in the ocean. Although they

How did the Jomon culture develop in

began in coastal areas,- and fishing with poles

endangered fishermen, they also

Hokkaido? The origin of pottery in Japan has

and nets and gathering of shellfish began.

drove whales ashore into human

been argued for some time, and the debate—

Gathering nuts, such as acorns and beechnuts,

hands. This sculpture was probably

whether it began in Japan itself or in China or

was another new activity that came with the

Siberia—has not been settled The Jomon

appearance of mixed coniferous-broadleaf

culture is divided into six periods according to

forests in Hokkaido. In short, the Jomon

used for rituals involving this animal; it
dates from the Middle Jomon period
(3,000-2,000 b.c.) and was found at
the Kikyo-2 site, Hakodate, Hokkaido.

changes in ceramics: Incipient, Initial, Early,

people devised a way of life in which they

Effigies of bears, deer, and turtles

Middle, Late, and Final. It is unclear whether

effectively utilized all available resources in

also date to this period. (HACRIC)

immigrants brought Jomon culture from

the environment surrounding their villages.

Honshu or whether people who had lived in

Just as there were regional differences

Hokkaido since the Pleistocene epoch ac¬

among various Jomon groups in Honshu,

quired Jomon characteristics indirectly by

Jomon culture sites in Hokkaido also did not

trade and social contacts with Honshu peoples.

have a single unified expression. Ceramics

In what way did the lifestyle of the

from the northern and southern parts of the

Jomon people differ from that of the Pale¬

Ishikari lowland were very different during

olithic people? Obviously, their lives were

the Early and Middle phases, whereas ceram¬

deeply affected by environmental changes

ics in southern Hokkaido were similar to

occurring at the end of the Ice Age, most

those found in the Tohoku district of north¬

importantly from climate warming. In Hok¬

ern Honshu but differed from those from

kaido this resulted in a change from taiga

northern and eastern Hokkaido. During these

(forest-tundra) to coniferous forest and later

periods, southwest Hokkaido is assumed to

to a mixed coniferous/broadleaf forest. In

have had strong cultural ties with the Tohoku

addition, rising sea levels caused the warm

district through trade and marriage.

Tsushima current to flow into the Sea of
Japan from the south, and the warmer sea-

Although many sites exhibit ties to
Honshu, evidence of northern contacts and

surface temperature brought heavier winter

material exchange with cultures of the lower

snowfalls and conditions that were generally

Amur River region via Sakhalin is seen at

warmer and more moist.

various stages. The strongest links appear to

In this environment the Jomon people

3 / PREHISTORIC HOKKAIDO

be during the Early Jomon period, when Sites

41

3.6

Ceramic Mask (replica)

to explain why Yayoi culture was not intro¬

This Final Jomon (ca. 400 b.c.) ceramic

duced to Hokkaido. One posits that its eco¬

mask was found in 1986 in almost per¬

nomic foundation, rice farming, could not be

fect condition near a Jomon cemetery
in the Mamachi site, Chitose, Hokkaido.

practiced there because of the harsh northern

Photogrammetry reveals careful render¬

environment, whereas another claims there

ing of the face, whose open mouth sug¬

was no need for rice farming because the

gests a death figure or a shaman in

hunting-and-gathering society established in

trance. Edge perforations show that it

Hokkaido was already economically self-

was attached to something else, per¬

sufficient. Both theories are probably correct.

haps to a grave post. Death masks are

Epi-Jomon culture did not simply re¬

found in Shang and Chou burials in
China, and in Ipiutak Eskimo burials in

place the Jomon hunter-gatherer society,

Alaska; Koryak and other ethnographic

for some characteristics particular to early

groups of northeastern Asia used

Epi-Jomon tradition have been observed

leather masks to cover the faces of the

in southwestern Hokkaido where they are

dead. (HMH; Japanese National Impor¬

recognized as Esan culture. Esan ceramics

tant Cultural Property)

show similarities to the Yayoi earthenware

in northern and eastern Hokkaido contain
ceramics, lithics, bone, ivory, and antler
artifacts (figs. 3.6-3.10) that are so similar to
Amur region cultures that an actual migration
of people is the most plausible explanation.

ZoK.ii-Jomon Culture
Around 300 B.C., agricultural people with iron
tools began to move into southern Honshu
and Kyushu from the continent. As this new
culture, known as Yayoi, expanded, its agri¬
cultural techniques were adopted by the Jomon
people, and this agricultural society gradually
expanded into northern Honshu By 100 B.C.,
Yayoi culture appeared in Aomori prefecture,
across the strait from Hokkaido. Yayoi led
Owl Eyes

directly to the initial stages of Japan's first state-

This ceramic fragment (Final Jomon,

level society, which emerged in the Yamato

1,000 b.c.) is one of the few archaeo¬

region in southwestern Honshu (today's Nara

logical pieces that show the kingfisher

prefecture) at the end of the third century as

owl, whose face is molded into the ves¬

social stratification and regional integration

found in northern Tohoku, and its people

progressed. This culture is called Kofun

used iron knives brought from that area. They

revere it as kotan-kor-kamuy (guardian

(Tumulus) after its practice of burying promi¬

also carved spoons with images of bears and

of the village) and honor it in ceremony

nent individuals in large mounds. These

sea animals reminiscent of the carvings seen

changes were not immediately felt in Hokkaido,

on Ainu ritual prayer sticks (ikupasuy), and

where a northern variation and an evolved

some ceramics have bearlike images, suggest¬

stage of the earlier Jomon tradition developed,-

ing a special religious and ceremonial interest

it is known either by the compound Zoku-

in this species.

sel rim. Although the owl’s role in
Jomon culture is not known, the Ainu

and ritual. This was found at the Bibi-4
site, Chitose, Hokkaido. (HPGBE)

3.9

Stone Rod (replica)

This stone rod (Final Jomon, ca. 1,000-

Jomon, which recognizes its regional charac¬

400 b.c.) was pecked from hard igneous

ter because "Zoku" means northern in Japa¬

rock; it comes from the Kashiwagi-B
site, Eniwa, Hokkaido. Two rings are cut
into one end and three in the other, and

Fishing techniques also advanced, and
new types of toggling harpoons (figs. 3.12-

nese, or by the term Epi-Jomon, which

3.14) made from iron were developed for

points to its later, modified nature.

sea-mammal hunting. These changes can be

Several hypotheses have been presented

both ends are colored with red ocher. Its

explained by trading relationships with the

function is unknown, but lack of wear
suggests that it had a ritual function.
Ornamented clubs were used by Eski¬
mos for killing seals, and Ainu and
Northwest Coast Indians had special
decorated clubs for killing salmon for
their first-salmon ceremonies. (HMH)
3.9

42

ANCIENT ROOTS / K. YAMAURA AND

H. USHIRO

which was advancing northward. Epi-Jomon
people also obtained goods from the Kinki
(Kyoto-Osaka) area, including swords, armor,
harnesses, precious-metal products, and glass.

Okhotsk Culture
In A.D. 400-500 an important new devel¬
opment occurred with the appearance of
Okhotsk culture in southern Sakhalin
(Yamaura 1998). Okhotsk people engaged
in sea-mammal hunting, shallow- and deep¬
water fishing, as well as hunting of land ani¬
mals,- they also raised pigs—a rather unusual
practice for a maritime-hunting society. The
techniques used to hunt sea animals originated
with the Epi-Jomon culture of Hokkaido,
whereas pig farming was introduced from the
3.11

Bear-Effigy Vessel (replica)

Effigies of animals have been found in
many Okhotsk sites, whose pithouses
sometimes have ritual altars. This bear

new Yayoi agricultural society of northern

lower Amur River region and China. Okhotsk

Tohoku that provided these Hokkaido people

ceramics show a complex mix of Hokkaido,

not only with iron tools but with rice and

Sakhalin, and Amur River styles.

other southern products that were exchanged

These people spread from southern

large wooden bowl that was carbon¬

for sea-mammal products and other valuable

Sakhalin to the Okhotsk coast of eastern

ized in a house fire; it was recovered

northern materials.

Hokkaido and further east and north into

head (ca. a.d. 800) was carved on a

from the Matsunorikawa Kitagishi
site, Rausu, Hokkaido. The presence
of a design resembling the Ainu itokpa

Epi-Jomon influence from Hokkaido

the Kuriles during A.D. 600-700. A major

extended south into the Tohoku district of

stimulus for this expansion seems related to

northern Honshu, and by A.D. 400-500, dur¬

political disorder in the lower Amur River

the killer whale and god of the sea,

ing its late phase, its influence is seen even in

region, resulting from the imposition of a

suggests the vessel had a ceremonial

the Sendai region near the northern boundary

tributary system by the Manchurian Sui

function. Similar effigy vessels (with¬

of Kofun (Tumulus) culture. This has been

and Tang dynasties and their allies in the

out itokpa) were used by Northwest

interpreted as evidence of Epi-Jomon interest

lower Amur. Okhotsk culture had difficulty

in obtaining goods from the Kofun culture,

advancing along the Sea of Japan side of

(ancestral mark) of repun-kor-kamuy,

Coast Indians. (RTBE)

< 3.8

Ceramic Figurine (replica)

Jomon ceramic figurines reveal ethno¬
graphic information through hairstyles,
clothing, and garment designs. This
figurine (Final Jomon, ca. 700-400 b.c.)
from the Motowanishi site, Muroran,
Hokkaido, establishes that Jomon
clothing utilized spiral-band ornamen¬
tation at the base and shoulders of
their garments similar to the morew
patterns produced by Ainu seam¬
stresses. Such figurines were probably
used for protection against illness,
infertility, and the dangers of child¬
birth. (HMH)

3.10

Pedestal Vessel

This elaborate Epi-Jomon (ca. 300 b.c.)
ceramic vessel from the Minamikawa
site, Setana-cho, Hokkaido, has the
shape and design of Final Jomon ritual
vessels. The open-work pedestal may
have facilitated its use for ceremonial
cooking. (HMH)

3/ PREHISTORIC HOKKAIDO

43

3.12, 3.13, 3.14 Fishhook and
Harpoons (replicas)

Maritime hunting and fishing required
specialized equipment. This hook and
the engraved toggling harpoon with an
agate blade were found at the EpiJomon (ca. a.d. 1) Esan site in
Hokkaido. The latter was used for hunt¬
ing sea mammals and swordfish. The
barbed harpoon with the serrated base
is made of deer bone and dates to the
Okhotsk period, ca. a.d. 500, from
Kafukai-A, Repun, Hokkaido. Because a
small fish is engraved on its base, it
was probably used to harpoon salmon
or trout. Eskimos used such decora¬
tions as a mark of respect that en¬
hanced a weapon’s power. (HMH)

3.17 Wide-Mouth
Vessel

This pot (ca. a.d. 800)
was reassembled from
broken fragments found
at Futatsuiwa site,
Abashiri, Hokkaido. It is
typical of vessels found at
Hokkaido Okhotsk sites with
a flat bottom, plain body, and
wavy lines around the rim.
Okhotsk was a maritime culture
that appeared in Hokkaido from
the north, displacing the previous
Epi-Jomon culture. (HMH)

44

Hokkaido and into the Hokkaido interior
because these areas were already occupied by
Epi-Jomon and Satsumon people. Nonethe¬
less, they did enter Japan's northern territories
and in most places found sea-mammal hunting
more productive than raising pigs, with the
result that sea-mammal hunting intensified
(figs. 3.13, 3.14, 3.18, 3.19). Advancing mari¬
time capabilities also resulted in expanded
trade contacts in which sea-mammal products
were exchanged for Japanese swords and
knives through Satsumon intermediaries and
for bronze ornaments and glass beads from
northeastern China through contacts in the
lower Amur.
Okhotsk people, who may have been
the first permanent residents of the Kurile
Islands, spread throughout the chain, where
their pithouse villages are found in protected
bays and coves, and even reached the north¬
ernmost islands and perhaps even southern
Kamchatka. In addition to fish and sea-mam¬
mal bones, their sites sometimes contain
reindeer bones and antler, indicating contact
or trade with the predecessors of the native
Itel'men peoples of southern Kamchatka, for
reindeer are not known to have occupied the
Kurile Islands.
Okhotsk pithouses were either pentago¬
nal or hexagonal in shape and had a diameter
of about 30 to 35 feet (10 meters). Upon ex¬
cavation, a deposit of bear and sea-mammal
cranial bones is often found inside the back
wall opposite the entrance. These bones are

interpreted as evidence that the residents
conducted "sending ceremonies" as did many
northern cultures in which the spirits of killed
animals were returned to their home worlds
with special rituals (figs. 3.15a, b, 3.16). De¬
tailed examination of the bear skulls (tooth
wear, muscle attachments) shows that these
animals were probably raised in captivity, as
was the case in the Ainu bear-sending cer¬
emony and similar ceremonies conducted by
Amur-area cultures. Several hundred years
later, around A.D. 1000, the Okhotsk culture
appears to have been absorbed or replaced by
Satsumon culture, which moved into their
coastal territories in Hokkaido.
Satsumon Culture
The Satsumon culture first developed in Hok¬
kaido around A.D. 700-800 (Yokoyama 1990).
The ceramics of this period reflect contempo¬
rary Honshu production methods, and other
aspects of Honshu influence can be seen.
Hokkaido Satsumon people lived in square¬
shaped pithouses with fireplaces, used
spindles and spindle whorls, and built round
cemeteries like those known in the northern
part of Tohoku,- there is little doubt that
southwestern Hokkaido, including the
Ishikari lowland in southern Hokkaido, was
strongly influenced from the south at this

ANCIENT ROOTS/ K. YAM AURA AND H. USHIRO

3.15a

3.15b

time, probably by actual migrations from

Post-Satsumon Culture

Tohoku that were themselves induced by

By A.D. 900-1000, a major change took place

expansion policies of the Yamato Imperial

in northern Tohoku. As agriculture grew

Court. Nihon Shoki (Chronicles of Japan) (720)

more efficient, people released from direct

indicate that fortified stockades were built in

food-production activities gradually shifted

A.D. 647 and 648 on the Sea of Japan side of

into the growing crafts-production market,

northwestern Honshu and that three naval

and men began making wooden implements,

expeditions were sent along the Sea of Japan

lacquerware, iron goods, and pottery to sell.

coast to Hokkaido, beginning in A.D. 658.

About the same time, the power of the samu¬

Meanwhile, on the Pacific coast, relics

rai class that had originated in southern

thought to belong to an administrative office

Honshu reached the north of Tohoku and

of the Yamato nation—a stockade or castle

their control over local residents was tight¬

dating to about A.D. 700—were discovered in

ened,- production of export goods to Hok¬

the Sendai plains. These stockades were built

kaido became more organized, and the life of

by the immigrants themselves who were

Satsumon people changed accordingly.

brought in to secure food and to fight as sol¬

Then, suddenly, about A.D. 1200, production

diers. This expansion of territory and the

of ceramics ceased, and housing styles

accompanying immigration policy encour¬

changed from pithouses to surface dwellings

aged northward movement of local residents

resembling those of the Ainu culture as

from northern Tohoku and were major factors

known from ethnographic studies. Although

contributing to the establishment of Hok¬

an incipient form of iyomante was present in

kaido Satsumon culture.

the Okhotsk culture, traces of this ceremony

Hokkaido Satsumon culture, which was

for sending back spirits of bears, which has

influenced by its sister culture in Honshu, also

become central to the ethnic identity of the

brought agricultural practices, including culti¬

Ainu, have not been found in Satsumon sites.

vation of barnyard millet and wheat, to Hok¬

This important link between Satsumon and

3.15a, b, 3.16

kaido for the first time. With this develop¬

Ainu remains to be made.

Effigy Spoons

ment, trade with Honshu became even more

(replicas)

Two of these spoons, from the EpiJomon Esan site, are of bone and
have a killer whale and a bear on their

Japanese migration to Hokkaido accel¬

important in order to acquire iron tools, fab¬

erated about A.D. 1 300 (Kikuchi 1984,-

rics, rice, and sake in exchange for local prod¬

Kikuchi and Fukuda 1989,- Kitagamae 1991).
Documents show that Hokkaido was a de¬

handles; they date from ca. a.d. 1. The

ucts, including the meat and hides of bear,

spoon below, decorated with a bear

deer, seal, and fur seal, as well as kelp, salmon,

portation site for criminals, who were sent

with outstretched paws, is from Usu-

and other materials.

there by the Kamakura Shogunate, and it is

10 in southern Hokkaido and is made
of antler. All were probably used in
animal-related rituals; the bear spoon
suggests use in an iyomante (bear¬

Such active trade naturally promoted

known from the Okawa ruins of Yoichi city

social stratification,- the emergence of tumulus

that fishermen and merchants began residing

graves venerating the memory and power of

there, although perhaps only seasonally,

sending) ceremony. Siberian peoples

local and regional chiefs is evidence of this

around A.D. 1200-1300. During the 1400s,

used similar effigy spoons to feed

phenomenon. Their prominence must have

Tosaminato in Honshu's Aomori prefecture

spirits until modern times. (HMH)

been enhanced by the growth of trade net¬

became a port of trade with Hokkaido. His¬

works in which Satsumon peoples exchanged

torical literature as well as archaeological

manufactured goods from Honshu for

evidence indicate that in the 1500s samurai

Okhotsk-culture raw rtiaterial products from

interested in the commercial potential of the

Hokkaido and the Sea of Okhotsk, and for

area built large establishments stretching

Chinese manufactured goods via lower Amur

from Tsugaru Strait to the Sea of Japan coast

middlemen. Eventually this relationship re¬

in southwestern Hokkaido, and military con¬

sulted in the absorption or replacement of

frontation between the Japanese who had

Okhotsk peoples by their Satsumon trading

moved into Hokkaido and the Ainu people

relatives to the south.

accelerated, leading in A.D. 1457 to the Battle

3/ PREHISTORIC HOKKAIDO

45

materials, and cultural complexes—including
movements of people—that show influence
from or have been imported from Honshu or
the Russian Maritime Provinces.
Biological mixing between Honshu
3.19 Engraved Needlecase (replica)

of Koshamain, the first significant revolt of

Prehistoric evidence of large whales

Hokkaido Ainu against the Japanese (Kudo

indicated, and during the formation of the

being hunted is often difficult to find,

1989; K. Tsuboi 1986,- Y. Suzuki 1996).

Satsumon culture, contact with the people

but this Okhotsk-period birdbone
needlecase (ca. a.d. 650) leaves little

During this period of increasing contact

Yayoi and early Epi-Jomon peoples is also

called Ernishi, who were an Ainu or Ainu-

to the imagination. A boat with six pad-

between Hokkaido and Honshu, Ainu con¬

related group in northern Tohoku known in

dlers and a standing harpooner is being

tacts with the Asian continent to the north

early Japanese written records, must have

towed by a large animal—almost cer¬

also intensified. According to Chinese

occurred. Contacts with the Satsumon and

tainly a whale—with lines attached to

records, the Ainu fought several times in the

Okhotsk cultures also introduced population

I 300s with the forces of the Yuan dynasty on

diversity in the region. It is by this process

two harpoons protruding from its side.
This artifact was found at the Bentento
site, Nemuro, Hokkaido. (HMH)

3.18 Sea-Otter Figurine (replica)
Sea otters were present in the Kuriles

the lower Amur and Sakhalin. The battles

that the Ainu physical type, as it is known

apparently began when the Yuan military

archaeologically and historically, emerged.

responded to the request for military assis¬

The ethnic image of the Ainu as pre¬

tance by the Nivkhi (former Cilyak) tribe

sented in the Ainu-e depictions and ethnogra¬

living in Amur River delta, where Ainu traded

phy—of a hairy, independent, hunting and

Honshu goods for local commodities and

gathering people who practiced animal spirit¬

Chinese trade goods including silk. A recipro¬

sending rituals and had a distinctive style of

cal trade from the Amur into Sakhalin and

clothing and artifact ornamentation—seems

Hokkaido was also conducted by the Santan

to have emerged circa A.D. 1200-1 300. Al¬

peoples of the lower Amur. This exchange of

though there is as yet no direct evidence from

goods through Hokkaido had a substantial

this period for existence of the Ainu iyomante

impact on Ainu society that is reflected in

ceremony, the fact that sending rituals were

hundreds of fortified stockades (chasbi) the

practiced with bears and other animals by the

Ainu built around this time to provide emer¬

Jomon and Epi-Jomon people suggests that

gency refuge from raids and attacks from

evidence linking early cultures with the his¬

Japanese and northerners. Apparently trade

toric Ainu will eventually be revealed.

until they were hunted to extinction by
the Russians in the mid-1800s. Recov¬
ered from Tokoro Fort, Hokkaido, this

disputes and heightened tension had become

sea otter (ca. a.d. 700) which was

the social norm of the times.

carved in the Okhotsk period from a
large canine tooth and bone remains of

Nevertheless, it is certain that Ainu cul¬
ture was influenced heavily during its forma¬
tion process by northern tribes through con¬

Conclusion

tacts with the people in Sakhalin and the lower

Archaeological and historical data present a

Amur River region. Meanwhile, development

waters more than a millennium ago.

fairly clear picture of developments in Hok¬

of the Japanese culture on Honshu affected

Aleut hunters tied similar carvings of

kaido over the 2,000 years since the begin¬

the formation of the Ainu culture as well; in

sea otters inside their kayaks to help

ning of the Epi-Jomon period. By contrast,

particular, the ripple effects from political and

a brown bear, indicates that these ani¬
mals were found in northern Hokkaido

protect them from misfortune. (HMH)

little is known about the preceding 20,000

economic development in Japanese Honshu

years of Paleolithic and Microlithic occupa¬

were strong forces of change. With this under¬

tions or about the origins of the 8,000-year-

standing of their development, the Ainu

long Jomon period. Nevertheless, we do

people are in the process of reaffirming their

know that the Jomon period was character¬

identity as known from circa A.D. 1200-1 300

ized by neither cultural stagnation nor bio¬

based on a heritage of more than 10,000 years

logical isolation. Jomon sites in Hokkaido

in Hokkaido and neighboring regions.

contain ample evidence of artifact types, raw

46

ANCIENT ROOTS / K. YAMAURA AND H. LISHIRO

T

he Ainu and their ancestors

ronments, and other North Pacific cultures

who lived in northern Japan,

have had a strong influence on the founda¬

Hokkaido, the Kuriles, and the

tions of Ainu culture.

southern Sea of Okhotsk area

4/Ainu Ties
with Ancient
Cultures of
Northeast
Asia
Toshihiko Kikuchi

The northern orientation of the Ainu is

have occupied a region that has been a geo¬

most fundamentally expressed in its geo¬

graphic and ecological border zone for thou¬

graphical relationships. The islands of Hok¬

sands of years. Anyone who has experienced

kaido and Sakhalin, separated by Soya

a near-subtropical Tokyo summer and a

Strait, are only twenty-six miles (forty-two

Siberian Sakhalin winter (fig. 4.1) can appre¬

kilometers) apart. Sakhalin in turn is sepa¬

ciate the extreme climatic and environmental

rated from the Asian mainland at Tatar near

diversity that characterizes this maritime East

the mouth of the Amur River by only 12.5

Asian zone and can more easily envision the

miles (twenty kilometers). Moreover, Tatar

power that geography has played on the

Strait is extremely shallow and is covered

history of the Japanese archipelago In effect,

by floating ice during much of the winter,

the Ainu homelands straddle three worlds:

which makes it easy to cross. Migrations and

temperate East Asia, the eastern Siberia taiga,

dispersals of animals and plants are known to

and the maritime western Pacific and its pro¬

have reached Hokkaido across these land

ductive peripheral seas, the Seas of Japan and

bridges, and in historic times various ethnic

Okhotsk. In many respects, however, the

groups in Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the Amur

Ainu homelands are unique unto themselves,

region maintained contacts across these

and their environmental and cultural histories

narrow bodies of water. Archaeological

4.1 Winter in a Sakhalin Village

reflect this transitional status. Ancient history,

evidence demonstrates that this connection

(Pilsudski, USNM 047414)

revealed through archaeological remains,

was also active in ancient times and that

clearly shows the influence of southern cul¬

Asian mainland and Sakhalin cultures had

tures on Hokkaido, whereas the northern

important impacts on the formation of an¬

Ainu territories in Sakhalin and the Kuriles

cient cultures in Hokkaido, including the

have a prehistory closely linked to the Amur

Ainu. Influences have been noted from as far

River region, Siberia, and Kamchatka (S. Kato

west as the Trans-Baikal region,- from the

1985,- Kikuchi 1984,- Kikuchi and Fukuda

south, cultures of the Sungari River were

1989,- Kikuchi 1995). In this essay we con¬

introduced. And archaeological work is now

sider the relationship of the Ainu and their

beginning to reveal the impact of cultures of

ancestors to these northern regions. Indeed,

Siberia and the Eskimo region. These influ¬

the Ainu themselves feel a strong pull in this

ences contributed to the formation of vari¬

direction and see their culture as closely

ous cultures in Hokkaido that developed

related to the cultures of North Pacific

features distinct from the ancient cultures of

peoples, even the North American Eskimos

Honshu. Finds indicating the ancient linkage

and Northwest Coast tribes. As we will see,

between Hokkaido and northeast Asia have

the northern resources (especially salmon, sea

been discovered especially from the Pale¬

mammals, and bears), the North Pacific envi-

olithic era and in Okhotsk-culture sites.

4/ANCIENT NORTHEAST ASIA

47

The Paleolithic Period

type burins (chisel-like tools for carving bone

Paleolithic-era remains from Hokkaido,

and antler) have been found at these sites;

dating from 20,000 to 12,000 years ago, are

similar stone tools have been discovered in

divided into three chronological and cultural

Ustinovka in the Maritime Provinces of the

stages (H. Kimura 1997). Sites of the first

Russian Far East (Primor'ye) and at Sokol' in

stage, which are assumed to be about 20,000

Sakhalin (fig. 4.2). These finds suggest that

years old, include Shukubai Sankakuyama

during this period Hokkaido was part of the

of Chitose city, Shimaki in Kamishihoro

same culture zone as those regions.

township, and Seo in Sarabetsu village. At

The third stage dates from about 15,000

Sankakuyama and Shimaki, knife-shaped

to 12,000 years ago, with Shirataki 32 and 33

tools similar to ones found in Honshu sites

of Shirataki village being important sites. The

of the same period have been discovered.

microblades, wedge-shaped microcores, and

In Shimaki and Seo, microblade cores and

Angara burins found here are similar to those

boat-shaped stone implements characteristic

found in Diuktai-culture sites (Mochanov

of far-off sites on the Yenesei, Angara, and

1980), which date from 16,000 to 12,000 years

Lena rivers in northern Siberia have been

ago in the Russian Aldan River region and are

found. These discoveries suggest that by

widely distributed in northeast Asia, ranging

20,000 years ago Hokkaido shared cultural

from the Yenesei, Angara, and Lena river basins

links with both Honshu and northeast Asia.

to Baikal, eastern Mongolia, Kamchatka, and

During the second phase of the Pale¬

Sakhalin (fig. 4.3). During this period people

olithic era, which began about 17,000 years

from interior northeast Asia migrated into new

ago, the sites of Horokazawa 1 at Shirataki

lands, including Hokkaido, in response to the

4.2 Microlithic Industries

and Shirataki 13 were occupied. Large blades,

warming climate and subsequent changes in

of Siberia and East Asia

boat-shaped stone implements, and Horuka-

animal distribution and the rise of the sea level.

The Mesolithic Period
Toward the end of the Ice Age, people learned
to develop new technologies that provided
them with light and more efficient weapons.
These changes usher in the Mesolithic period,
which in Hokkaido dates from 12,000 to 8,000
years ago Its characteristic stone tools have
tanged points and probably were used for arm¬
ing arrows. Similar points have also been found
in Tatekawa of Rankoshi, Tachikarushunai of
Engara, and elsewhere. Such lithics character¬
ize the Osipovka culture of the Russian Maritimes, dated from 10,000 to 8,000 years ago,
and have also been found in Sakhalin, suggest¬
ing a continuation of the types of cultural links
found from Hokkaido throughout much of
northeastern Asia during the Mesolithic era.

The Neolithic Period:
Jomon Culture
Throughout Japan, including Hokkaido, the
culture of the Neolithic period (Chiyo 1984a,
b) is called Jomon (fig. 3.2). Blade arrowheads
have been found in 7,000-year-old Early
Jomon sites. Similar arrowheads have been
discovered in Neolithic sites in many areas of
northeast Asia, and blade arrowheads are
characteristic of the Novopetrovka culture
(7,500 to 6,000 years ago) in the middle
Amur River basin. This widespread dispersion
of similar artifacts suggests that people who

48

ANCIENT ROOTS / T KIKUCHI

utilized blade arrowheads spread across
northeast Asia into Hokkaido. Late Middle
Jomon culture (4,500 to 4,000 years ago) in
Hokkaido is characterized by Hokuto-type
pottery. Similar pottery has been found at
the Imchin Site II in northern Sakhalin,
which suggests that cultural exchanges took
place between Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the
lower Amur in this period as well (fig. 4.6).
Small fragments of iron tools have
been discovered in the ruins of tombs from
the Final Jomon period (200-100 B.C.) at the
Kaizukacho 1-Chome site of Kushiro City
in Hokkaido. By the last stage of the Jomon
culture, 3,000 to 2,000 years ago, the Amur
River basin and the Maritime Provinces of
the Russian Far East had already entered the
Early Iron Age, and various types of iron
tools and weapons were being used. Many
4.3

Upper-Paleolithic Artifacts

4.4

Late-Neolithic Artifacts

items crafted from iron have been found in

from Sakhalin

from Sakhalin

sites of the Uril culture (eleventh-seventh

This assemblage of tools excavated

This collection from Nevelsk II. Imchin

centuries B.C.) and the Pol'tse culture (seventh

in 1973 by Valerii Shubin from Takoie

II, and Sadovnik II illustrates Neolithic-

century B.C.—fourth centuries A.D.) in the

II in southern Sakhalin has been

period artifacts from Sakhalin Island.

dated to 16,000-14,000 b.c. Its coni¬

Peaked-rim ceramics resemble early

cal and wedge-shaped cores and

Jomon styles and points show careful

unifacial points are the kind of as¬

bifacial technology. Although many

and the Krounovka cultures (fifth-seventh
centuries B.C.) in the southern Maritime

semblage that could have been a pro¬

different types of harpoons have been

totype for American Paleo-lndian cul¬

recovered from these sites, none

tures of 10,000-8,000 B.c. The

resemble those found in other North

brown obsidian characteristic of

Pacific types. (SKRM)

Shirataki in eastern Hokkaido indi¬

lower and middle Amur River basin and
in Yankovskii (ninth-fifth centuries B.C.)

Provinces of the Russian Far East It is
thought that the iron tools found in the
tombs of Kaizukacho in Kushiro City were
brought by the people of the Pol'tse culture.

cates early contacts between peoples
in Sakhalin and Hokkaido. (SKRM)

Epi-Jomon Culture
In Hokkaido, Jomon culture continued to
follow its own trajectory for nearly a millen¬
nium after it was replaced in Honshu by the
Yayoi culture, which advanced north gradu¬
ally as its rice-agriculture lifestyle usurped
the previous Jomon hunting-and-gathering
economy. This Jomon "extension" culture in
Hokkaido is called Epi-Jomon, although
Japanese archaeologists have sometimes
used the term Zoku, which means northern,
to characterize it. Epi-Jomon culture dates to
the first to seventh centuries A.D., corre¬
sponding to the Middle Yayoi period of
Honshu. Iron knives have been found in
tombs of the Rausuchou Llebetsugawa ruin,
which date from the early Epi-Jomon period
(first to second centuries A.D.), and small
traces of silver were found on fragments of
an ornamented knife case. A number of
silver ornaments have also been found
dating to this period in tombs of nomads in
the Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region,
Shanxi Province, and in Heilongjiang

4/ANCIENT NORTHEAST ASIA

49

4.5 Lacquered Comb (replica)

origin of the Okhotsk culture. This author be¬

Early use of lacquer Is shown in this

lieves that Okhotsk derives from an ancient

ornamented Late Jomon comb (ca.

culture of the lower Amur River, when one of this

2,000-1,000 b.c.) from the Bibi-4 site,
Chitose, Hokkaido. It must have been

region's ethnographic peoples, the Nivkhi (previ¬

used both for combing and decorating

ously known as Gilyak), formed a distinct culture

hair. Lacquer technology, based on

in the third century in Sakhalin. The range of the

building up repeated applications of

Okhotsk culture extended to Hokkaido when

pigmented sap from certain trees, be¬

probable ancestors of the Nivkhi people mi¬

came a long-standing artistic tradition
in East Asia. (HMH)

grated into that region about 1,000 years ago.

4.6, 4.7

of Japan and Russia written after the seven¬

According to the ethnographic literature
Evocative Women

Small ceramic figurines served as

teenth century, Ainu people lived in Sakhalin

house deities or charms to protect
women from disease and the dangers
of childbirth and were used for thou¬
sands of years in northeast Asia. The
figure (4.6) with the swept-back fore¬
head and Asian features was called
“Nefertiti of the Amur" by its excavator,
A. P. Okladnikov, and dates to ca.
4,000 b.c. Her Final Jomon companion
(fig. 4.7) of a later millennium (1,000-

Province in China, so it seems likely that silver

300 b.c.), from Ohnakayama Site
(Nanae, Hokkaido), wears a necklace,
reveals something of her hairdo, and

reached Hokkaido by trade with the Amur
River region.

also seems to have Asian features.
(HMH; MIHPP Kn-63-48090, replica)

4.9

Needlecase with Geometric

Engraving

(replica)

Found at Kafukai-a site, Rebun, Hok¬

Okhotsk Culture
The formation of Satsumon culture was influ¬
enced by the Kofun-period culture of Honshu,
which coincided with the final period of the

kaido, this Okhotsk birdbone needle

Hokkaido Epi-Jomon culture,- many scholars

case (ca. a.d. 500) has a carefully ex¬

believe that the Satsumon culture (seventh-

ecuted geometric design whose motifs
evolve from panel to panel. It not only
resembles the needlecases of the
Kurile Ainu but also those made by

thirteenth centuries) is the ancient culture of
the Ainu. From the latter half of the Epi-Jomon
period and during the Satsumon-culture period

Aleut and Central Yup'ik Eskimos of

(fourth-thirteenth centuries) people of the

and the Kuriles, in addition to Hokkaido,

the Bering Sea coast. (HMH)

Okhotsk culture lived on the east coast of

although the date of their arrival has rarely

Hokkaido on the Sea of Okhotsk (figs. 4.8,

been discussed. Based on studies by this au¬

4.9). According to studies of human bones

thor, Ainu people advanced into Sakhalin in

excavated from burials, Okhotsk people were

the middle of the thirteenth century and to

of a different biological group than the Ainu.

the Kuriles from the fourteenth to fifteenth
centuries,- as a result of this movement, the

Sites of the Okhotsk culture have pro¬
duced various types of iron-, silver-, and

Ainu in the historic period inhabited southern
Sakhalin, Hokkaido, and the Kuriles.

bronzeware (fig. 4.8), which have been found
in sites of the Mohe culture (fourth-ninth

Ainu Origins: A Northern View

centuries) in the lower and middle Amur re¬

Scholars have presented various theories

gion, in the succeeding Jurchen culture, and

about the origin and lineage of Ainu people

in the Tongren culture (fifth-tenth centuries)

(Arutiunov, Ishida, this volume). To under¬

in the lower and middle Sungari River basin.

stand their origin it is necessary to know that

In short, metal products of the Okhotsk culture

the ancient culture of northeast Asia extended

came from the Amur and Sungari River regions.

to Hokkaido from the Paleolithic to the

There are various theories about the

50

ANCIENT ROOTS /T KIKUCHI

Okhotsk period. The repeated influence of

4.8

Bronze Belt Ornaments (replica)

This set of bronze belt ornaments (ca.
a.d.

700) was found at an Okhotsk

site at Menashitomari in northern
Hokkaido. Belts with similar decora¬
tions were used for curing rituals by
Siberian shamans from the mainland,
where bronze technology was consid¬
ered powerful. These ornaments
probably found their way to Hokkaido

northeast Asian cultures on Hokkaido brought

regard. After many hundreds—if not thou¬

for a similar purpose. (HMH)

stone tools, metal products, and other materi¬

sands—of years of interaction, Ainu people

als (including Santan silk robes in the early

have been barred from contact with their

modern period) to Hokkaido (Harrison 1954,-

northern neighbors since 1945 when the

4.11

Mixed-Race Family of Sakhalin

Bronislaw Pilsudski's notes indicate
that this Sakhalin family had Ainu,

Tezuka 1998). Those items probably were

Russian government expelled most of the

Russian, and Ul'chi roots. By the time

introduced both by actual movement of peoples

Ainu residing on Sakhalin to Hokkaido and

Pilsudski arrived in 1903, a penal

(migrations, casual contact, slaving, and genetic

evacuated Ainu from the southern Kuriles.

contacts) as well as by trade. The Ainu physical

Since then, Hokkaido has become the only

colony had been established on Sa¬
khalin and with it had come an influx

type was gradually formed through interracial

remaining Ainu "homeland" and the keeper

marriages with the residents of Hokkaido and

of Ainu traditions from Sakhalin, Hokkaido,

quired territory. Sakhalin’s geographic

the northern (Okhotsk) peoples who were

and the Kuriles (fig. 4.11). Travel and com¬

position in the most populated seg¬

moving into the region. Hokkaido was also

munication with other Sakhalin and Amur-

ment of the vast North Pacific Rim

constantly influenced by the cultures of

area groups ceased, and many Ainu ethno¬

Honshu throughout the periods of its Paleo¬

logical treasures that had been collected in

lithic, Jomon, Epi-Jomon, and Satsumon

the eighteenth to nineteenth centuries re¬

of Russian “outlaws" and political
exiles sent to populate this newly ac¬

kept it at the center of human move¬
ments and change. (NAA 98-10365)

'if i

4.10

cultures,- nonetheless, it

mained inaccessible in the Sakhalin Regional

would appear that the

Museum in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. Japanese

ancient cultures of north¬

contacts with Sakhalin are beginning to be

east Asia had a major

restored, and many Sakhalin Ainu now living

impact on Hokkaido

in Hokkaido would like someday to return

people and cultures, and

to visit their old homelands and see the

the Ainu ethnic group

artifact collections and records that docu¬

must have formed in part

ment their past. Archaeological exchanges

f

through contacts with

are also now taking place, and excavations

.VAT

those northern immi¬

conducted by Japanese and Russian archae¬

grants.

ologists have the potential to resolve the

Recent political

many questions still remaining about Ainu

events have had their

origins and their ancient northern connec¬

own influence in this

tions.

Sakhalin Okhotsk Assemblage

Okhotsk, a northern culture with a
strong sea mammal-hunting
economy, employed a technology
that was both efficient and beauti¬
fully manufactured. This group of
implements from the Solov’evka and
Promyslovoe II sites in southern Sa¬
khalin reveals exquisite workmanship
in the antler and bone harpoons. The
tiny seal in the middle of the picture
is evidence of forms and modeling
that seem organic and alive. (SKRM
5081-82, 5395, 3756)

4/ANCIENT NORTHEAST ASIA

51

I
Ancient
People of
the North
Pacific Rim:
Ainu Biological
Relationships with
Their Neighbors
Hajime Ishida

T IS NO EXAGGERATION TO SAY THAT THE

but rather to ascertain the lineage of the main¬

search for human history on the islands

land Japanese (fig. 5.1). The Ainu who lived in

of Japan—in other words, Japanese

Hokkaido were used simply as a reference point

anthropology—began with studies of

toward this end.

the Ainu and questions about their origins.
During the Meiji era (around the end of the

In the Taisho era (1912-1926) the theory
that the Jomon people were the ancestors of

nineteenth century), scholars debated

the Ainu began to be questioned. This was the

whether people of the Japanese Stone Age,

result of knowledge gained from human bones

i.e., the Jomon people, were Ainu. Shogoro

of the Jomon period collected by Kenji

Tsuboi (1 887) asserted that the "Koropok-

Kiyono (1949) and Kotondo Hasebe (1949),

guru," as the indigenous population of Hok¬

as well as comparative studies using statistical

kaido was referred to in an old Ainu legend,

tools, which were relatively objective and

were the indigenous population of all the

detailed for the standard of the time. In addi¬

Japanese islands. He believed they were Japa¬

tion, the flatness of the long bone shafts was

nese, not Ainu, because Ainu, unlike Japanese,

shown to be a common feature among hunt¬

made neither ceramics nor stone tools and did

ing-gathering populations worldwide, thus

not live in pithouses.

weakening the Jomon/Ainu connection.

On the other hand, Yoshikiyo Koganei,
(1 893) an anatomist, made an anthropological
study of Ainu skeletons and compared them

The Ainu "Race" Theory
In seeking to establish the origins of the Ainu,
scholars all over the world have commented
on or written about their "racial" characteris¬
tics. It is important to define what is meant by
the word "race” before examining the history
of the search for the biological origin of the
Ainu. In the past, race was seen as a biological
category of humankind, and various classifica¬
tions were made. Humans were commonly
divided into three or four categories:
"Caucasoids" who are seen mainly in Europe,"Negroids" who live south of the Sahara
Desert in Africa,- "Mongoloids," found prima¬
rily in Asia,- and "Australoids," common to
New Guinea and Australia. However, the stan¬
dard for this categorization was extremely
vague, and its regional borders were unclear.
Now it has become clear that all of human¬
kind belongs to one species whose biodiversity
reflects regional characteristics, and the tradi¬
tional concept of "race" has been superseded
by a more complex view of population biol¬
ogy and biogeography. In studies on the ori¬
gin of the Ainu that began in the nineteenth

5.1

Ainu Woman on the Amur

To make full descriptions of cultures

with Stone Age skeletons that had been col¬

century, however, the word "race" was fre¬

lected from a shell mound. Although no com¬

quently used, so in my discussion of these

and their history, early anthropologists

plete cranium sample was available, Koganei

studies this term will therefore appear in quo¬

linguistic, and archaeological data on

found common characteristics between the

tation marks.

cultures they studied. Photographic

Stone Age people and the Ainu, principally a

records, considered crucial for docu¬

llatness of the shafts of the long bones in both

scholars had vastly different opinions. The

groups. Based on this, he insisted that Japanese

"Caucasoid" and "Mongoloid" theories were

Stone Age people were Ainu, thus refuting the

the most common, but Russian and Polish

gathered biological as well as cultural,

menting “racial types,’’ included both

As to which "race" the Ainu belong,

full-face and profile views; body mea¬
surements and head and bust casts
were sometimes taken as well. (NAA

koropok-gum theory, which soon faded away with

anthropologists like Shternberg and Pilsudski,

98-10380)

the death of Tsuboi and the discovery ol Ainu

who were more versed in ethnology than

pithouses during a Kurile Island survey by

in physical anthropology, tended to advocate

52

Ryuzo Torii in early 1899. The purpose of these

the "Australoid" theory. The anatomist

studies was not to learn the origin of the Ainu,

Yoshikiyo Koganei (1893) believed that the

ANCIENT ROOTS / H. ISHIDA

Ainu did not belong to any of these "races"

this view the Jomon people, whose culture

and used a different term altogether:

existed throughout the Japanese islands from

Rasseninsel, meaning an islandlike or isolated

1,000 to 8,000 years ago, became today's

race. Kiyono criticized all these theories by

Japanese through changes in living environ¬

introducing a new method of inquiry that may

ment and physical transformation under the

betray the influence of the American anthro¬

influence of the Yayoi culture (200 B.C. to

pologist Franz Boas and his approach to the

A.D. 200). Neither Hasebe nor Suzuki, how¬

study of North Pacific Rim peoples at the turn

ever, expressed views on the Ainu. The

of the century:

theory that "Ainu equals Caucasoid" sug¬

We need to divide Hokkaido into several

gested by many—including the two authori¬

areas and examine the physical constitution

ties, Sakuzaemon Kodama, an anatomist,

of the Ainu by area. Obviously Karafuto

and Tanimoto Furuhata, a forensic scien¬

[Sakhalin] and Chishima [Kuriles] will be

tist—was accepted as the norm (S. Kodama

treated in the same manner. After the

1970c,■ Furuhata 1962). Nevertheless, many

differences by area are noted, as well as the
relationship between the shape and

scholars believed that the Jomon and the

condition of ancient human bones and their

Ainu were totally different groups, and this

relevant period becomes clear, surveys of

presented a problem in examining the popu¬

neighboring ethnic groups would be

lation history on the Japanese islands as a

desirable. Only after these steps, will the

whole. It should be noted that at that time

search for Ainu origin be complete.

the term "Japanese" referred to ethnic Japa¬

Further, he concluded, "Many years of effort

nese, not to all the people who lived on the

by scholars would be required." Fdis words

islands of Japan,- throughout these early

remain true today, and our task continues.

discussions the difference between the Ainu

The theory that the Ainu are "Cauca¬
soid" or are descendants of "Caucasoids" was
most popular from the beginning to the

and the Japanese was always emphasized.
In the 1960s, two physical anthropolo¬
gists, Kazuro Hanihara and Bin Yamaguchi,

middle of the twentieth century. For example,

made an important discovery in Hokkaido,

E. von Eickstedt (1934), a German anthro¬

where they had been examining bones from

pologist who believed that the Ainu were a

Jomon sites. Yamagachi came to the conclu¬

surviving group of ancient "Caucasoids,"

sion that the Jomon skeletons from southern

stated, "The Ainu provide important evi¬

Hokkaido were similar to those from main¬

dence that Caucasoids were widely spread in

land Jomon sites but that the bones from the

northern Eurasia and are survivors of those

eastern part of Hokkaido clearly showed

who used to live in the east of this region."

Ainu characteristics. This was surprising to

W. W. Fdowells, an American physical anthro¬

many scholars who held the belief that

pologist at Harvard University, also con¬

Jomon and Ainu people were totally differ¬

sidered the Ainu to be holdovers from the

ent. Based on these findings, Yamaguchi

ancient Caucasoids, claiming in Mankind in the

wrote, "The Ainu were living in Hokkaido

Making (1959) that the existence of the Ainu

since very old days, and they might have had

showed that "Caucasoids" once extended fully

a strong relationship with the Jomon people

to the Far East. Henri V. Vallois in his Les races

of the mainland" (Yamaguchi 1962).

humaines (1967) took the same view. These

Hanihara commented, "The important point

theories were based almost exclusively on the

is that the Ainu issue has always been closely

physical appearance of the Ainu, especially

connected to the origin of the Japanese."

their hairiness and the "deep" features of the

Almost at the same time, Kunihiko Kimura

face, including large and long noses, deep-set

(1962) revealed similarities between the Ainu

eyes, and a prominent brow.

and other neighboring groups of East Asia,
based on fingerprint-pattern research.

Subsequent Ainu Study

Kazuro Hanihara (1970, 1979), a dental

Most Japanese scholars were more interested

expert, studied physical characteristics of

in the origins of the Japanese than in the

teeth of "Mongoloid" peoples and identified

physical anthropology of the Ainu. For this

the "Mongoloid dental complex" with the aid

reason, after the Second World War, Kotondo

of data collected in Japan and the United

Hasebe's (1949) and Hisashi Suzuki's (1969)

States. He determined that Ainu teeth were

theory that the Jomon people became the

part of this Mongoloid group, thus becoming

Japanese found broad support. According to

the first to question the "Ainu/Caucasoid"

5 / BIOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS

53

UPPER

JAW

SUNDADONT

theory. Later, a 1979

shape of the cranial and postcranial skeleton

study based on tooth-

conducted by Bin Yamaguchi and others,

crown measurements

who have reported (Yamaguchi 1973,-

showed that the Ainu,

Yamaguchi, Ishida, and Matsumura 1993)

the ethnic Japanese,

that the Kurile cranium shape is similar to

the Aleut, and the Pima

that of the Hokkaido Ainu and that their

Indians all could be

relation to northern peoples is limited,- how¬

categorized as one

ever, their findings of similar tooth shape

"Mongoloid" group.

between northern Ainu and Aleut did point

As studies of

to northern admixture in this regard.

human bones from the

If there had been no influence of for¬

Jomon period continue,

eign cultures in Hokkaido from Jomon to

many similarities with

Early Modern periods, the formation process

the Ainu have been

of the Ainu would move from the Jomon

reported. However,

period directly to the Ainu cultural formation

since the Second World

phase,- however, no history of a human popu¬

War relatively few

lation could be so straightforward due to the

ancient skeletal collec¬

very nature of human activities. Although a

tions have been discov¬

few human bones have been found that indi¬

ered in Hokkaido, the

cate a mixture of some northern "Mongoloid"

5.2 SlNODONT AND SuNDADONT TOOTH TYPES

location most closely connected with the Ainu.

elements in the Early Jomon period, the issue

Christy Turner’s dental research

The situation is even more difficult in Sakha¬

cannot be resolved because of the limited

shows that Asian Mongoloid teeth

lin, which was occupied by the Soviet Union.

number of skeletal samples. Facial bones of

As mentioned previously, Bin Yamaguchi

the southern Honshu Yayoi period (250 B.C.A.D. 250) that were assumed to belong to the

occur in two types: Sinodont North
Asians or Sundadont Southeast Asians.
Sinodonts have incisors with scooped-

(1981) pointed out that human bones of the

out or "shovelled” faces, single-rooted

Early Jomon period found in northeast

Epi-Jomon Esan Culture of southern Hok¬

upper first molars, and triple-rooted

Hokkaido revealed Ainu characteristics, and

kaido in the first millennium A.D. do show

bones of the Epi-Jomon period (a late Jomon

some changes: 'This group maintained char¬

culture in northern Honshu and Hokkaido)

acteristic qualities of the Jomon people while

lower first molars. Most Ainu teeth are
Sundadont, which suggests that Ainu
originated from a southeast Asian
population that moved north into Japan

show these features even more clearly. In fact,

going through significant diversification. As a

before North Asian Sinodont peoples

such close similarities in the physical features

whole they approximated Ainu forms of the

appeared there. Today’s Japanese, like

of the cranium—such as the high nose, a low

modern period in southern Hokkaido," ac¬

Chinese, Koreans, and Amur populations,

facial center, and the shape of the postcranial

cording to Bin Yamaguchi (1981). As is typical

skeleton—between the Ainu and Jomon is not

of other regions in the world, scholars con¬

have Sinodont teeth, (after Fagan 1990).

seen in other comparable groups from East Asia.
Based largely on their historical dis¬
tribution, the Ainu have often been grouped

54

tinue to debate whether this diversification
was brought about by genetic influence or by
changes in living environment.

into three regional types: Hokkaido Ainu,

Around the fifth century A.D., the

Sakhalin Ainu, and Kurile Ainu, and their

sudden appearance of the Okhotsk culture

diagnostic physical differences have been

along the Sea of Okhotsk coasts of Sakhalin,

confirmed, to varying degrees, by specialists

the Kuriles, and northern Hokkaido indicates

from Kyoto and Hokkaido Universities. Kenji

a major migration of new peoples from the

Kiyono of Kyoto University discussed the

north, bearing a culture that differed greatly

Sakhalin Ainu in his 1949 book, stating that

from the Yayoi-influenced Epi-Jomon and

the Sakhalin Ainu were "purer" because they

Satsumon groups of Hokkaido. Okhotsk

lived farther away from the main Japanese

people possessed features of northern

island of Honshu and because Sakhalin Ainu

populations—wide, high, flat faces and

have the smallest variation between individu¬

stocky bodies. These people probably

als in cranial measurements. Meanwhile,

originated from near the estuary of the Amur

Sakuzaemon Kodama of Hokkaido Univer¬

River, but their relationship to the current

sity, drawing his conclusions from their large,

Nivkhi peoples of this region is unclear. The

flat faces, assumed that elements of Nivkhi

influence of the Okhotsk people on Ainu

and Orok populations were mixed in with the

physical character during the period of

Sakhalin Ainu (S. Kodama 1970c). This view

Okhotsk culture decline (after A.D. 1 300)

of mixed blood with northern populations

cannot be ignored. Rather, the possibility of

was supported by statistical studies on the

an Ainu advance into Sakhalin at this time,

ANCIENT ROOTS / H. ISHIDA

laying the biological and cultural foun¬

certainly characteristics of populations have

dations of the Sakhalin Ainu, is one of many

clear and direct genetic control and can be

disputed questions arising from controversies

used to trace population histories. Today

relating to the origin of regional cultural and

such studies are seen as complexes, not as

biological differences seen among the Ainu.

discrete traits.) In 1966 the Japanese Com¬

As mentioned previously, Kazuro

mittee for the International Biological Pro¬

Hanihara (1970) has asserted that the Ainu

gram conducted a biological study of the

belong to the "Mongoloid" cluster based on

Japanese and Ainu under a research grant

his studies of Ainu teeth. Christy C. Turner II

from the Ministry of Education. This was the

has also studied "Mongoloid" teeth morphol¬

first project in which Ainu physical charac¬

ogy and found that there were two types of

teristics and physiology as well as genetic

"Mongoloid" peoples: Sinodont ("Chinese

factors obtained from blood samples were

toothed") and Sundadont ("Southeast Asian

examined. Keiichi Omoto and Shogo

toothed") (figs. 5.2, 5.3). In the 1980s the

Misawa (1976), who conducted research on

feature of Southeast Asian teeth),

theory that the origin of the Jomon and Ainu

protein polymorphism in blood, reported

chipping, lack of caries or abcesses,

was in Southeast Asia emerged from the fol¬

that genetic markers of the "Caucasoid" type

5.3

Jomon Teeth

Jomon people were hunters, fishers,
and gatherers rather than agricultur¬
alists. These incisors from an adult
male show ablation wear (a common

and some evidence of peridontal dis¬
ease. The accompanying molars

lowing logic: the Sundadont characteristic is

were not observed among the Ainu,- rather,

common to human populations in Southeast

many Ainu genetic traits were common to

Asia, and because the Ainu as well as the

the East Asian group of peoples. Even after

show the customary Southeast Asian
four-cusped M2, no enamel exten¬
sions on Ml or M2, and both molars

Jomon people are categorized as Sundadont,

taking into account the high degree of mixed

have two roots. (Turner 1979)

it was assumed that the Sundadont cluster

blood between the Ainu and the Japanese in

from Southeast Asia had moved north into the

1966, the results were the same. As a result

Japanese islands. This theory was an impor¬

of a group genetic study by Keiichi Omoto

tant factor supporting Hanihara's (1991) pro¬

(1972), it was determined that the Ainu were

posed "dual structure model" for the popula¬

part of the "Mongoloid” group. Although

tion history of the Japanese. Hanihara sup¬

significant differences between the Ainu and

ported both the multiorigin theory and the

Japanese are recognized, genetic research

phylogenetic affiliation between the Ainu and

placed the Ainu closer to East Asians, which

Ryukyu people. This supposition is also simi¬

includes Japanese and Koreans, than to other

lar to one advocated in the nineteenth century

recognized groupings of world populations.

by the German scholar Erwin Baelz (1883),

Today there can be no doubt that the

who postulated that the people of the Jomon

Ainu and Asian populations are related,

period were originally from Southeast Asia

based on morphologic and genetic studies,

and that during the Yayoi period other East

despite questions raised by cranial and teeth

Asian peoples arrived and spread over the

measurements that strongly suggest a con¬

Japanese islands. The populations in Japan

nection between the Ainu and Southeast

that today retain traits from the Jomon era are

Asian groups. On the other hand, Ainu rela¬

the Ainu and Ryukyu people.
C. L. Brace and K. D. Hunt (1990) intro¬

tionships to the north Asians are quite
strong. For example, in the area of genetics,

duced a concept called the "Jomon-Pacific

the distribution of immunoglobin haplotypes

cluster," which stressed the similarity of the

has been studied by Hideo Matsumoto

Ainu and Jomon to groups of Pacific Islanders

(1987), and his "Lake Baikal Theory of Japa¬

based on cranial measurements,- further, he

nese Origin" suggests that the Ainu share

suggested a relationship with Native Ameri¬

elements with northern peoples. Other fac¬

cans. In his view, the Jomon are the common

tors suggesting connections with northern

ancestors of groups in the Pacific and of Ameri¬

populations have been found in genetic stud¬

can Indians, a concept that differs from Turner's

ies, notably nine base-pair deletions in

findings. The common assumption, however, is

noncoding region V of mitochondrial DNA,

that Ainu ancestors were Jomon and that they

and in morphological work, seen in a large,

were part of the East Asian group.

high occipital lambda measurement and a
distinctive cheekbone suture known as the

Genetics and Morphology

transverse zygomatic suture vestige. Of

Buntaro Adachi (1937) studied types of ear-

course, one character alone is certainly not

wax and found that Japanese earwax is dry,

sufficient to identify phylogeny in any case.

while Ainu wax, like that of "Caucasoids," is

Recently, Omoto and Saito (1997) con¬

wet. (Although such findings may seem odd,

ducted a phylogenetic study based on a large

5/ BIOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS

55

A Neighbor-Joining Network of 15 Populations
(a part of the network of 25 populations; Da distances were used)
0.01,

\
Ancestral Ainu
(subtracting 40% gene
Korean. \ _ '
flow from Japanese)
Japanese-Vt
r~ Mongolian
Tibetan/
\
/Southern Chinese

/

Polynesian-^ /

KC'^Thai
-Negritos (Aeta)

' lndcr^\
RhpmOnesian ^Negritos (Mamanwa)

Micronesian'

'Australian
Papuan/

5.4

Ainu Genetic Distances

This nearest-neighbor diagram shows
the gene-frequency relationship of

dataset of genetic polymorphism among all

post-Yayoi periods, and they did not find

people on all the Japanese islands, i.e., the

similarities between the Jomon/Ainu and

Ainu, Hondo-Japanese (those on the Honsho

Southeast Asia group. This author recently

a reconstructed Ainu population to

mainland), and people on Ryukyu, as well as

looked into the relationship between the Ainu

Koreans, using the most recent statistical

and neighboring groups by studying cranial

Ainu and southeast Asian populations

techniques. The results showed that the Ainu

morphologic changes. Results showed that

is indicated, (after Omoto 1995)

and Ryukyu people constitute one cluster and

the Ainu are closer to Neolithic people

the Hondo-Japanese and Koreans another,

around the Central Asian region of Lake

other groups in Southeast Asia and
Oceania. Little relationship between

5.5

Ainu Cranial Distances

Supporting evidence for northern

supporting theories of Ainu/Ryukyu affiliation

Baikal and peoples of the Amur River basin

origins is seen in studies of cranial

and indicating that new people probably

and that similarity with Southeast Asians

morphology, which show Ainu to be

moved into the Japanese islands in the Yayoi

was limited (fig. 5.5).

more closely related to Neolithic and

period Based on phylogenic studies of all

As the result of biological study on the

modern populations of Central Asia,
Lake Baikal, and the Amur Basin
than to southeast Asians.

other world population groups, the research

Ainu people over the past one hundred years,

concluded that the Ainu, Hondo-Japanese, and

the so-called "Ainu/Caucasoid" theory has

Koreans belong to the cluster of groups of east

largely been disproved, whereas the supposi¬

and northeast Asians,- affinity between the Ainu

tion that the Ainu were descended from the

and Southeast Asia groups was not observed

Jomon of the Japanese islands has been sup¬

(fig. 5.4). This result directly demonstrates the

ported, both by morphological and genetic

origin of the Ainu in eastern or northeastern

studies. For example, Satoshi Horai extracted

Asia, although the issue of admixture was not

mitochondrial DNA from ancient human

resolved or seriously considered.

bones and demonstrated that the base order

In terms of morphological studies, Yukio

56

of four samples of Jomon DNA and two of

Dodo and 1 (1990) and Nancy S. Ossenberg

Ainu DNA were the same. He also found a

(1986) reconstructed phylogenetic relation¬

DNA resemblance between Jomon and

ships among human populations by examining

Southeast Asian peoples. However, more

detailed morphogenic cranial changes. They

detailed research will be necessary to answer

confirmed the assumption made from previous

remaining questions about Ainu origins and

morphologic research that the Jomon and

relationships, and for this the discovery of

Ainu shared similarities and that the two

more human fossils, as well as further genetic

groups were separate from the Japanese of

research, will be required.

ANCIENT ROOTS / H. ISHIDA

T

he word "Ainu" means "human" in

the Ainu language. Because Ainu
was always a spoken rather than a
written language, an alphabet was

Ainu
Language:

The origins of Ainu language and its relationship to other

never developed, and the language has there¬

linguistic groups, like Ainu cultural and biological ancestry,

fore been expressed by the alphabets used by

have long been both a scholarly mystery and a source of

transcribers who recorded it. Currently, both

speculation. Unlike knowledge gained from historical and

Katakana (one of three types of Japanese

Features and

archaeological studies, in which incremental gains are made

characters) and Roman letters are used. In

Relationships

through the acquisition of new data, linguistic information

this essay, Roman letters are employed and

available to scholars will not increase through time because

accent symbols are omitted to facilitate non¬

the Ainu language today is spoken only by a handful of

expert appreciation.

Suzuko Tamura

traditional speakers who inherited it from their parents and
villagers. It seems likely that the stewardship of Ainu lan¬
guage will soon pass into the hands of speakers who learned it
from linguists and other indirect sources, thus breaking forever
the chain of inherited knowledge that forms the backbone of
"living languages." If this does come to pass, the documenta¬
tion that currently exists, including the recorded information
obtained from the few remaining speakers, will form the cor¬
pus of future knowledge. This essay presents a status report
on Ainu language and outlines its chief lexical and gram¬
matical features, its current status and prospects, and the long

An Ainu-Language Primer

Phonology
Ainu has five vowels {a, e, i, o, u) and only
twelve consonants: c, h, k, m, n, p, r, s, t, w, andy,
and ('). Ainu has no distinction between
voiceless (k, p, t, etc.) and voiced (b, d, g, etc.):
for example, the word that means "mother" is
expressed as hapo but can be pronounced ei¬
ther “hapo" or "habo." The sound of the letter c
is an affricate similar to the sound of ch in

history of investigations that have been conducted to deter¬
English There is only one fricative sound, s,
mine its origins, affinities, and legacies. [W.F.]
which is never voiced. The sound of the letter
r is similar to a Japanese r, namely, somewhere
between English d, l, and r. In many Sakhalin
dialects, p, k, r, and I cannot be placed at the
end of a syllable, and h is used instead. This
results from regional phonetic changes, as is
demonstrated in the following:

Hokkaido

kap

set

tek

utar

sik

Sakhalin

kah

seh

teb

utah/utara sis

Definition

skin

bed

hand

people

eye

Ainu syllabic structure is simple: in some
syllables one consonant is attached to one
vowel either at the front or end or both sides
of a syllable,- in other cases, no consonant is
attached. There are no consonant clusters as,
for example, the str in the word "strike."
6.1

Map of Hokkaido Ainu Dialects

Word Order
The Ainu language has a so-called "SOV"
pattern (subject, object, verb). The subject
comes before the predicate and the object/
complement is placed before a related verb
phrase. The verb comes at the end of the
sentence, for example, hapo kekachi nukar (lit¬
erally: mother boy see/saw, or Mother saw
the boy). The adjective comes before the
word modified,- for example, poro chise means
"big house," whereas chise poro means "the

6/ AINU

LANGUAGE

57

house is big." In addition, there are no ar¬

1 sinep

6 iwan

I 1 sinep ikasma wanpe

ticles, and a postpositional adverb or a

2 tup

7 arwan

12 tup ikasma wanpe

postpositional particle is used instead of a

3 rep

8 tupes

20 hot

30 wanpe etubot

preposition, as in apa kari ahun (he entered

4 inep

9 sinepes

40 tubot

50 wanpe erebot

through the door, with kari meaning through),

5 asik

10 wanpe

60 rebot

70 wanpe einebot

or tan kotan ta an (it is in this village, with ta
meaning in or at).

The consonant ending of numbers one to
four {p) means "thing," and the letters pre¬

Verb Tense
The verb does not change according to the
tense. For instance, the sentence bapo kekachi
nukar can mean "Mother will see the boy [to¬
morrow]" or "Mother is [now] seeing the boy/
Mother sees the boy” or "Mother saw the boy
[yesterday]." The meaning is derived from the
context and situation.

ceding it are adjectival forms expressing "of
one," "of two," "of three," and "of four."
The origin of the word for five is probably
the Ainu word for "hand" (aske in the
modern language). The words for six to nine
mean "with four, ten" and "with three, ten."
In other words, six equals "minus four plus
ten," and seven equals "minus three plus
ten," and so on. From eleven on, the phrases

Vocabulary
Ainu has few words that express abstract con¬
cepts or properties frequently associated with
complex societies. However, terms closely
related to daily living activities (hunting, fish¬
ing, and gathering) and important items such
as animals and plants are abundant. For ex¬
ample, salmon, a major component of the Ainu

mean "excess one, ten," "excess two, ten,"
etc., up to nineteen. The word for twenty is a
different word, and forty, sixty, and eighty,
etc. are expressed in the vigesimal (twentybased) system, as in 2 x 20, 3 x 20, 4 x 20,
etc. rather than in the decimal (ten-based)
system used nearly universally today. The
number thirty-seven is expressed in Ainu as:

diet, was simply called cbep (fish) or kamuy-cbep

arwan pe

(god/fish),- male salmon was called cba and

seven thing excess ten thing with two twenty

ikasma wan pe

e-

tu-

hot

female salmon os. Salmon caught in the autumn
was called sipe. The ragged tail of old spawning
salmon was called oysiru (when parsed, literally
o [its tail], y- [things], siru [scrub]).
Ordinary nouns often became taboo de¬
pending on the season or place, so other expres¬
sions had to be used. For example, according to
Mashiho Chiri (1957), while trout was often
called icban-iw (dig spawning hole/person who
digs a hole), it was called sak-ipe (summer/fish)
during the salmon season. This switch occurred
because salmon, which also digs a spawning pit,
was more important than trout, and people did
not wish to offend it and thus cause a poor

In short, thirty-seven is (7- 10) + (2 x 20).
By using this system it was possible to count
to two hundred, but because there was little
reason to ever count to such a large number,
Ainu elders in the 1950s did not understand
what "two hundred" meant,- it was not custom¬
ary to count large numbers, including people's
age. However, in Sakhalin Ainu language
there was a term indicating the unit of one
hundred. The expressions of figures also var¬
ies depending on the region,- for instance, the
Sakhalin Amu employed the decimal system,
not the vigesimal system.

catch. In order to avert an evil spirit, words
that the spirit hated were used. Taboo words

Current Language Situation

were especially common while the Ainu were

In recent historical times—about two hun¬

in the animal domains in the mountains and at

dred years ago—Ainu speakers occupied the

sea, and code words were used frequently in

region from Hokkaido north to Sakhalin's 51°

these situations. Special words were also used

latitude and throughout the Kurile chain as

when praying to the gods, and some particular

far as southern Kamchatka. Other records

expressions were used depending on the age

from that time note that people in the lower

group of the speaker.

Amur River region claimed to be descendants
of the Ainu, but whether they were indig¬

Numerals

enous to that area or moved there for some

The manner in which the Ainu language ex¬

reason is not known.

presses numbers is also distinctive. The fol¬

58

Evidence of earlier Ainu occupations has

lowing shows forms of counting in the Hok-

also been adduced by the study of place-names.

kaido dialect.

The earliest records of Ainu words are found in

ANCIENT ROOTS / S. TAMURA

eighth-century documents, in addition, Ainu

ies appeared in the eighteenth century, writ¬

vocabulary still exists among hunters in northern

ten by a Russian, a Frenchman, and a Japa¬

Honshu. Place-names also reveal Ainu roots in

nese. The first vocal recording was made by

Honshu, especially north of Sendai. There are

Bronislaw Pilsudski, a Pole, in the early twen¬

place-names that suggest Ainu once lived in

tieth century, using wax cylinders. Also note¬

Niigata and perhaps further south, but these

worthy is Ainsko-Russkii Slovar (1875), an

latter claims need further study. To the north, a

Ainu-Russian dictionary prepared by a Rus¬

nineteenth-century Russian encyclopedia men¬

sian, M. M. Dobrotvorskii. The first Ainu

tions that the Ainu language was used in the

grammar, "Grammar of the Ainu Language,"

Russian Primor'ye and in the lower Amur River

was written by the English missionary John

region, but these cases are not well documented.

Batchelor (1 887),- Batchelor also published an

At the beginning of the twentieth cen¬
tury, Ainu was spoken in three major dialects:

Ainu-English-Japanese Dictionary and Grammar,
whose first edition appeared in 1889. His

Kurile, Sakhalin, and Hokkaido. When the

fourth edition (1938) is still being used de¬

Soviet Union took over Sakhalin and the

spite the enormous number of errors that

Kurile Islands in 1945, most of the Ainu

have had a negative impact on later scholarly

people moved to Hokkaido,- today there are

studies (see below).

no Ainu speakers left on these islands. In the
1950s two dialects remained in the residual

More reliable linguistic study began in
Hokkaido with A Study ofYukar.- The Ainu Epics

Hokkaido Ainu homeland, Hokkaido and

(1931) by Kyosuke Kindaichi. Mashiho

Sakhalin. The Hokkaido dialect was further

Chiri, a student of Kindaichi, developed

divided into northern and southern regions, or

further his teacher's grammar theory and

into three sections: north, east/middle, and

extended it to the Sakhalin Ainu language,-

south (fig. 6.1). Within each of these areas

he focused on words and their origin and

there were further regional differences. At that

compiled the well-received Classified Dictio¬

time, some of these dialects had more than ten

nary of the Ainu, which appeared in three vol¬

fluent speakers, but currently there are only a

umes (Man, Plants, and Animals) (Chiri

few speakers of the east/middle and south

1953-62). The work done by Kindaichi and

Hokkaido dialects,- of those, only one fluent

Chiri established the foundation for all later

speaker is left in each district. However, with

serious research on the Ainu language.

some training, some older people who used the

Itsuhiko Kubodera, another student of

language when they were young might again

Kindaichi, also did detailed research on Ainu

become fluent. The estimated number of these

yukar, or oral epic poems. In the latter half of

"candidates"—the most optimistic potential for

the twentieth century, building upon the

survival of indigenous Ainu language—is

study conducted by Chiri and Shiro Hattori

twenty to thirty people.

on the basic vocabulary of Ainu dialects, in¬

The Ainu people have shown a great

tensive research on dialect vocabularies was

interest in reviving their language and culture,

conducted by Hattori and his colleagues and

and Ainu language classes given by the Hok¬

students. The first achievement of their efforts

kaido Ainu Association (see Nakagawa, this

was the publication of the Ainu Dialect Dictio¬

volume) are currently held in fourteen loca¬

nary (Hattori 1964).

tions. Although traditional culture can be

In more recent times a growing number

learned in classes, these venues have not yet

of people have contributed to Ainu-language

been adequate for an effective language pro¬

studies. These include some of Hattori's stu¬

gram. It is hoped that the Ainu Shinpo passed

dents, who were motivated by the imminent

by the Japanese Diet in 1997 will improve the

threat of Ainu language becoming extinct, and

social and financial environment for Ainu-

their students at Hokkaido Llniversity, including

language preservation and use.

Ainu and foreign students who are conducting
studies of dialects and written records of folk

History of Ainu-Language Studies

literature, music, ethnology, history, and ar¬

Apart from several Ainu proper nouns in

chaeology,- some are assisting in the revival of

eighth-century historical accounts and Ainu

the language. The publication of books con¬

words in various texts later on, the first small

taining grammar descriptions, dictionaries,

Ainu glossaries did not appear until the seven¬

video materials, and vocal records with ex¬

teenth century and were written by foreigners

planatory texts increased sharply in the

and Japanese. Larger glossaries and dictionar¬

1980s and has accelerated in the 1990s.

6/ AINU LANGUAGE

59

Among these are three practical Ainu dictio¬

cate of the Austronesian theory of Ainu-lan¬

naries (Nakagawa 1995, Kayano 1996, and

guage origin (see below and Arutiunov, this

Tarnura 1996),- Ainu Gmmatik (two volumes,

volume), states that the origin of enciu (enciw)

1989-97) by Hans A. Dettmer, which intro¬

is 'mpoltiw (person respected) of PAN (the

duces the entire corpus of Ainu grammar to

reconstructed language, Proto-Austronesian)

date in German; and two works on European

and that Ebisu, a synonym of Emishi, comes

Ainu studies edited by Kirsten Refsing, The

from this word. The Ainu language, espe¬

Ainu Library L Early European Writings on the Ainu

cially the Sakhalin dialect, has also borrowed

Language (ten volumes, 1996) and The Ainu

words from Orok, Nivkhi, and Russian,

Library II: Origins oj the Ainu Language: The Indo-

while the Kurile dialect contains more terms

European Controversy (five volumes, 1998).

borrowed from Russian.

In addition to studies by professional
academic linguists, one cannot fail to mention

Place-Names

the lifelong efforts of Shigeru Kayano, who is

Many place-names of Ainu-language origin, al¬

Ainu,- Kayano (fig. 6.2) also collected (and

though transformed by Japanese pronunciation,

sometimes built) artifacts and tools used by

still remain in Hokkaido and northern Tohoku,-

the Ainu, and he also published Ainu Folk

Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands also have many

Crafts (1978). Kayano is a unique traditional

names whose origin is Ainu (fig. 6.4). Travelers to

speaker who has also written a dictionary and

Hokkaido will often hear place-names ending

made numerous oral recordings.

with -betsu or -nai; the meaning of the Japanese

Japanese-Language Influences

The alternate term for river, -nai in Japanese, is -

Because the Ainu people have long been famil¬

nay in Ainu, but its meaning changes to stream in

iar with the Japanese language, it is only natu¬

the southern dialect. Because rivers and streams

ral that the two languages have influenced

were important Ainu travel routes and resource-

each other (fig. 6.3). Many Ainu words are

procurement areas, these words appear frequently

suffix -betsu is the same as the Ainu term pet (river).

clearly borrowed from Japanese. Examples

in place-names. Many other place-names also

include (Ainu/Japanese): tampaku/tabako (ciga¬

originate from geographical features.

rettes), tenonkoy/tenugui (hand towel), umma/uma
(horse), puta/buta (pig), peko/beko (Japanese

the southern limit of former Ainu occupation

Tohoku dialect, cow), and tuki/tuki (Old Japa¬

is Shirakawa-no-Seki in southern Fukushima

nese for wine cup); Japanese words became

because names ending in -betsu and -nai de¬

known to the Ainu people when the products

crease south of this point. Unfortunately,

themselves were introduced by trade. The

many people who study place-names do not

Japanese influence is not limited to nouns and

know the Ainu language well and simply

covers other elements of grammar, from verb

compare words that seem similar to Ainu and

to adverb. Cases of Ainu-language influence on

make their own interpretations. Linguists,

Japanese are fewer, and the majority of them

however, have found the task to be more dif¬

also deal with trade materials: for instance

ficult, and definitive explanations of place-

(Japanese/Ainu), rahko/rakko (sea otter), tonakai/

names are few. Even Hosei Nagata's well-

tunakkay (reindeer), shishamo/susam (a kind of

known Interpretation of Hokkaido Ezo Place-

fish), and ruibe/ruype (frozen salmon: ru [thaw],

Names (1891) contains numerous mistakes

ipe [food—in this case, fish]).
6.2

Preparing Inaw

Cultural leader Shigeru Kayano carves

inaw for an Ainu display at Kokuritsu

Kyosuke Kindaichi (1932) assumed that

As previously mentioned, Ainu means

according to Mashiho Chiri, who is highly
respected for his work on place-names.

"human" in Ainu. The word menoko (Ainu

Hidezo Yamada also did excellent work on

women) was borrowed from the Tohoku dia¬

the subject and identified the Ainu origin of

Minzoku Hakubutsukan (National Mu¬
seum of Ethnology) in Osaka.

60

lect of Japanese, and it was reimported to the

many place-names (four volumes, 1983).

Japanese language. According to Kyosuke

Yamada did not depend simply on word com¬

Kindaichi, the words Ernishi (an old word for

position and knowledge of Ainu vocabulary,-

Ainu people), and Ezo (meaning "different

he visited locations carrying Ainu place-

northern people" and the term by which Ainu

names and confirmed the geographical fea¬

were known in Hokkaido before 1868),

tures described in the names. By repeating

which often appear in Japanese history, derive

such visits many times, he gained a rapport

from the old Ainu words emciw or enciw (mean¬

with the local people who used these names,

ing human),- enciw is still used by the Sakhalin

and he became familiar with the geography

Ainu. Shichiro Murayama (1992a), an advo¬

that had particular names. In this way, the

ANCIENT ROOTS / S. TAMURA

origin of many names in Hokkaido and north¬

Ainu-Lancuage Origins

ern Tohoku were explained. Although there

and Affinity

are quite a few place-names whose origins

The fact that the physical characteristics of

have not been identified, the table below

the Ainu people differ from those of neigh¬

provides examples of well-known Ainu place-

boring populations made a strong impression

names in Hokkaido.

on foreign visitors encountering them for the

Place-names ending in -sonai or -sbonai are
also found in both Tohoku and Hokkaido.

first time and triggered speculation about
their origin. Noting their resemblance to

When simply looking at the word, it appears to

Russians, many people thought the Ainu

be an Ainu place-name, and John Batchelor,

were Caucasians: some believed this and

working in the nineteenth century, attributed all

thought that there were Ainu with blue eyes,

such names to the Ainu. However, the town of

which is false. Some say that the people liv¬

Shonai in Yamagata prefecture has a Japanese

ing in Okinawa (the southernmost Japanese

name which means "inside of (Oizumi) village."

island) resemble the Ainu. Some Ainu and

Looking at the word without visiting the loca¬

Okinawans themselves say this, and in fact,

tion itself is not sufficient to determine

results of dental structure and genetics, in¬

whether the name is Ainu. Because the syllable

cluding blood-group and DNA tests, do

structure of both Ainu and Japanese is simple,

show a close relationship. Some speculate that

the probability of finding similar word forms in

both groups were linked through Jomon ties

place-names and general terms is high, but

to the original native inhabitants of Japan

similarities alone do not signify shared origins.

before the spread of the Japanese people,
which was enabled by rice agriculture. How¬

it
’ y tg
a*
'V >- &
kk

inn Ift m§>m
tpm A A

ever, recent scholarship shows that the deter¬
mination of ancestral links is far more compli¬
cated than previously believed. Anthropolo¬

7 ^

gists long ago showed that the language, cul¬
ture, and biology of any particular people may
have separate and quite different histories.
Like other areas, Ainu language has also
been studied for clues about its history and
relationships. Reverend John Batchelor, an
Englishman who lived in Hokkaido from 1877
to 1940, published Ainu grammar books and
dictionaries during his tenure there as a mis¬
sionary. He believed that Ainu was related to
the Aryan (Indo-European) languages
(Batchelor 1905, 1926, 1938,- see also Refsing
1998). Although Batchelor believed that the
Hidezo Yarnada went to one of the villages

chief evidence for an Aryan origin of the Ainu

Protocol called for feasts and other

called Sonai, which is located in Akita prefec¬

language would be found in the grammar

hospitality when Japanese and Ainu

ture, with an old map and observed the topog¬

rather than in vocabulary, no evidence of this

paid visits to each other’s villages.

raphy. He found that the region had many

has since been found. It must be remembered

Ainu-sounding names and discovered a village

that he did not know the Ainu language well,-

where some Ainu words were still in use in

that his grammar and dictionary contain many

6.3

Entertaining Japanese Officials

This copy of an Ainu-e from Shimanojo
Murakami's Curious Sights of Ezo Is¬

land illustrates two Japanese officials
being entertained in the Ainu style.

their dialect. When he also found a stream and

mistakes in word forms,- and that he had

(NMNH 392,023-25).

a waterfall, he determined that the characteris¬

"stretched" Ainu to fit it into a western-lan¬

tics of the area matched perfectly its Ainu

guage grammatical framework. Batchelor's

name, sonai, meaning "fall-stream."

views continued to be argued by later European

Generally, the place-names cluster geo¬

scholars advocating Ainu-Aryan affinity, who

graphically,- the areas north of Sendai and

referred to Batchelor's dictionary and picked

Yamagata have many Ainu place-names.

out Ainu words similar to Aiyan ones. Pierre

However, one name in Niigata, which is south

Naert made many such matches in arguing for

of this cluster, has been confirmed to have

an Indo-European theory (1958), as did Ivar

Ainu origins,- some places south of Niigata

Lindquist (1960). The controversy, which can

and in northern Kanto may have had Ainu

be reviewed in works collected and reprinted by

names, but this has not been confirmed.

Refsing (1998), continued until 1965.

6/ AINU LANGUAGE

61

In the nineteenth century Yonekichi

oned Ainu epic poetry (yukar) as great works

Miyake, a historian, discussed the relationship

of literature, studied the Ainu language for

between the Japanese and Ainu languages after

the first time from a linguistic point of view.

studying their pronunciation, grammar, and

He supported Chamberlain and determined

vocabulary from written records (1884). In the

that Ainu had no affinity with Japanese, based

end he concluded that "the two languages can¬

on his analysis of word structure and the nu¬

not be identified as the same kind of language,"

meral system (Kindaichi 1927, 1935). He

because similarities in grammar were limited to

emphasized important differences between

"factors generally found in undeveloped lan¬

Ainu, Japanese, and the languages of the sur¬

guages." Basil Hall Chamberlain was the first

rounding peoples, based on the language

scholar to introduce European philology to

found in the yukar, which was known to pre¬

Japan, and he began the first extensive com¬

serve ancient Ainu language structure. His

parison of the Ainu and Japanese languages.

conclusion was that "Ainu is a completely dif¬

Although there are problems with his work

ferent language from Japanese, Korean, and

because it also used Batchelor's data, the lin¬

Altaic languages and is an isolated language of

guistic analysis was his own He disagreed with

the world

Batchelor's Aryan theory and concluded there

new direction, noting similarities in the usage

was no evidence to place Ainu in the same

of numerals between Ainu and the Eskimo,

language group as Japanese or Altaic languages,-

Native American, and Basque languages.

rather, he suspected that Ainu was in fact an

After Kindaichi's definitive conclusion

isolated language and noted that the issue

about the separateness of Ainu and Japanese,

needed further study. Chamberlain assumed

Ainu was rarely mentioned in studies of Japa-

that similarities in Ainu and Japanese sentence

nese-language origin. Mashiho Chiri, who

structure and phonology were probably the

produced the remarkable Classified Dictionary of

result of mutual association of speakers over

the Ainu, seldom touched on the issue of Ainu

thousands of years.

origins and affinity, except in a seven-line

In the early twentieth century Kurakichi

statement in an encyclopedia entry (1964):

Shiratori, a historian, compared Ainu, Japanese,

"No language with relationships to Ainu has

and Korean numerals in relation to other lan¬

yet been found. While some languages share a

guages. He wrote: "Korean ... is not at all simi¬

few important characteristics, such as phono¬

lar to Japanese .... Ainu . . . which has been

logical organization and grammar, basic lin¬

thought to have no resemblance with any lan¬

guistic elements do not connect them at all.

guage in the world has numerals that are closest

Today's study has not reached the stage of

to the northern Ural-Altaic group such as Finno-

discussing its genealogy. One can only state

Ugric and Samoyed" (Shiratori 1909).

that its affinity is unknown "
In 1955, however, Shiro Hattori re-

Later, Kyosuke Kindaichi, who champi¬
6.4 Ainu Place-names

At the same time, he pointed in a

Japanese name

Old Ainu names

Translation

The extent to which Ainu people
formerly occupied Honshu and Sa¬

Sapporo

sat-poro- (pet)

dry-big-(river) [pet is assumed]

khalin is not fully known, but Ainu

Wakkanai

yam-wakka-nay

cold-water-river [yam is dropped]

and Ainu-derived place-names exist

Kamuikotan

kamuy-kotan

god-village [terrible place with rapid
stream and cliffs,- exists in many places]

as far south as Sendai and Niigata
as far north as central Honshu,
and in central Sakhalin, which sug¬
gests that Ainu once held large ar¬
eas of these islands.

Shiretoko

sir-etoko

earth-edge of [cape,- exists in many areas]

Erimo

enrum

cape

Biratori

pira-utur

cliff-between

Osachinai

o-sat-nay

end of river-dry-stream

Toya

to-ya

Iake/pond-of shore [exists in many areas]

Noboribetsu

nupur-pet

strong color-river [river is whitened with
hot spring water]

Horobetsu

poro-pet

large-river

Honbetsu

pon-pet

small-river [exists in many areas]

Soobetu

so-pet

fall-river [exists in many areas]

Islands ofe the tip of Kamchatka:

62

Shimushu

si-mosir

Poromoshiri

poro-mosir

big-island

Paramushiri

para-mosir

wide-island [the same island as above, different name]

ANCIENT ROOTS / S. TAMURA

major-island

searched the basic vocabulary of various Ainu

Korean Peninsula and Ryukyu Islands

dialects and expressed the probability that

seemed to have been introduced around

Ainu and Japanese had the same origin based
on vocabulary comparisons with Japanese,
Korean, and the Altaic languages. Quite a few
words of the basic Ainu vocabulary seemed to

that time. . . . The language which had
weak contact with the East China Sea
region survived to date as a language with
a different lineage. This is the Ainu
language (1985).

share similar roots with Japanese words. Hattori
criticized Kindaichi's conclusion, saying,

Another major supposition presented

Such resemblance in basic vocabulary

by researchers is the Austronesian theory of

should not be ignored by citing accidental

affinity with languages of southeast Asia,

resemblance or mutual borrowing.... The

Indonesia, and Australasia (figs. 6.5, 6.6).

grammatical structure of Ainu is not different

This view was first advanced strongly by

to the extent that one can determine no

Leo Shternberg, a Russian ethnologist who

affiliation with Japanese. Such conclusion is
unproductive even if it is a working supposi¬
tion. It is unfavorable also in the sense that it
discourages Japanese from studying Ainu
(Hattori 1957).
James Patrie of Canada presented "evi¬
dence" showing many "sound correspondences"
between Ainu and Japanese as well as "morpho¬
logical and lexical evidence" (1982), and he also
discussed his theory of Ainu-Altaic language
affiliation. Patrie's efforts in gathering many
pairs suggesting correspondences were followed
by other similar efforts, including, for instance,
Shichiro Murayama (1992b).
As Shiro Hattori had found, quite a few
words in Ainu, Japanese, Korean, and the Altaic
languages have similar roots,- however, similarity
in word form does not necessarily signify affin¬
ity. By using a "glottochronological" method
based on the assumption of shared origin, the
split between Ainu and Japanese has been calcu¬
lated to have occurred 6,000 to 10,000 years
ago (Hatton 1959). What would happen to a
language after 10,000 years? Some calculations
suggest that only 1 percent of the basic vocabu¬
lary would still be in use. If this is taie, it is
rather questionable that so many similar words
could remain If the phonological correspon¬
dence in nonsimilar word forms is found it
would be more reliable as evidence, but such
examples have not been identified.
Besides the linguists mentioned so far,
there are many who have pointed out the
similarities between Ainu and Japanese or
Korean/Altaic languages, including Chili
(1962), Haruto Oni (1957), and Alexander
Slawik (1982). Masachie Nakamoto devel¬
oped a more specific reconstruction:

had been associated with Franz Boas's Jesup
North Pacific Expeditions of 1897-1902
and worked extensively among the Sakhalin
Ainu in the early 1900s. He believed that
Ainu could not have originated from Siberia
or other northern places or from Korea or
China, because it had no linguistic or cul¬
tural relations in these directions. He con¬
cluded (1929) that the Ainu had an
Austronesian lineage based on the accumu¬
lated strength of multiple lines of biologi¬
cal, ethnological, and linguistic data. Argu¬
ments similar to Shternberg's were made
later by Gjerdman (1959) and Shichiro
Murayama (1992a), who compared Ainu
words with Austronesian-language terms.
Gjerdman, who was critical of the Indo-Euro¬
pean language theory, also proposed that Ainu
might have come from the south, citing simi¬
larities with Malay-Polynesian (today's
Austronesian). He was not strongly convinced,
however, and called for further analysis.
Murayama's research presented more than
thirty Ainu words that were similar to Proto
Austronesian (PAN). In these comparisons the
Ainu words is given first, the PAN second: ape
((ire)/apuy (fire),- cbikir (leg and foot)/tic)uel (leg),pirka/pirika/pilib (to select, being selected).
How do we resolve these analytical
problems? Because the Ainu language has few
consonants and its syllable structure is
simple, there are many homonyms. For ex¬
ample, Ainu pa can mean "year" (and from
this, "seasons"),- "air” ("steam," etc. — from
this, "epidemics," etc.),- "head/upper side,"
"mouth," "down river",- "to find",- and "to go."
It is also easy to find similarities in other
languages that could suggest sound corre¬

The ethnic group with the Ainu language
must have advanced to the East China Sea
coastal area a long time ago and made

spondence,- in short, the probability of coin¬
cidence is high. Moreover, because Ainu and

contacts with those populations living on

Japanese share the characteristic of many

the coastal line. The Ainu words which

words beginning with k and f, similar word

show connection to the language of the

forms are easily found in both languages. In

6/AINU

LANGUAGE

63

general, even in core vocabulary, the borrow¬

among Ainu, Japanese, and fifty other lan¬

ing and replacement of words take place.

guages, and he compared them with the num¬

Thus, when the presumption of a genealogical

ber of actual matches. The resulting statistics

century photograph documents. This

relationship is based on similarities of vo¬

showed the matches among Japanese, Ainu,

carrying method, which is also found

cabulary, if the rules of the sound corre¬

and Korean to be highly significant

among Southeast Asian peoples, was

spondence are not clear it is necessary to

(Yasumoto 1972, 1985).

cited by early anthropologists as evi¬

prove that such similarities do not occur

6.5, 6.6

Carrying Children

Ainu women used special headstraps to
carry their babies, who were supported
on a wooden seat, as this nineteenth-

dence that the Ainu had southern ori¬

Although statistical studies indicate that

due to coincidence or borrowing. It is not

a close relationship in core vocabulary exists

easy to determine the true nature of such

among Japanese, Korean, and Ainu, how

the most complex objects woven by Ainu

similarities in the case of a language without

should this be interpreted? Yasumoto inter¬

women. This strap was collected from

historical records.

gins. The headbands of these straps
carry intricate designs and are among

the Kurile Islands by Romyn Hitchcock in
1888. (NMNH 150768; AMS).

preted it as genealogical descent from an an¬

Some methods to deal with this issue

cestral language he named "early Far East

were developed by mathematicians, who used

language," which he thought might have

statistical techniques to describe the fre¬

come from the Asian continent. Of the early

quency of matches and similarities in a core

Far East languages postulated by Yasumoto, it

vocabulary. From among these techniques

has been theorized that the one based in

Biten Yasumoto employed the "shift test

northern Kyushu was influenced by southern

method" developed by R L. Oswalt (1964) to

languages and then spread to the Japanese

test the probability of coincidental matches

islands to become the ancestral Japanese lan¬
guage (Yasumoto 1985).
The other possible explanation is that
these matches result from influence, i.e., bor¬
rowing. Although statistical analysis shows
that the number of similarities is too high for
all the matches to be coincidental, it cannot
be concluded that similarities indicate com¬
mon origins, for matches may also result from
influence due to geographical proximity or
social relations. Because there is no reason to
think that the extensive borrowing of Japanese
and Amu words in the modern era is unique,
Ainu, Japanese, and Korean must also have
affected each other in the past. In the case of
a language without historical records, an ef¬
fective way to decipher the earlier forms of
words is by examining place-names,- for this
reason the place-name work being conducted
by FTdezo Yamada and others may lead to
important new findings.

Conclusion
Kyosuke Kindaichi's conclusion that Ainu and
Japanese had separate roots greatly influenced
6.6

64

ANCIENT ROOTS/ S

TAMURA

later linguistic thought. As Chamberlain

basic vocabulary words could not have been

showed, however, Ainu language structure is not

avoided. Not only is it difficult to ascertain if

vastly different from that of Japanese,- in fact,

correspondences result from genealogy or bor¬

when compared with the Indo-European and

rowing, but there are cases in which words with

other language groups, Ainu word structure is

a common origin cannot be considered "com¬

quite similar to Japanese. Much has been made

mon remaining words," for they have assumed

of the difference between the Ainu numeric

totally different forms in each language as a

system and the Japanese system, but this may

result of phonetic changes. Many people catego¬

not be significant because such usage can

rize words that have even small similarity in

change with time, as it has in the Ainu dialects

forms in Ainu and Japanese (or other languages)

in Hokkaido and Sakhalin. Such differences also

as "holdovers from common basic words," but

exist between Indo-European languages.

one must move beyond the preconception that

The point has been made that the Ainu

such words have a common origin: attempting

verb incorporates the person indicator respond¬

to establish proto-language from sound corre¬

ing to the subject and object (Kindaichi called

spondences does not make sense.

this the "incorporating character"),- this differs

As previously stated, numerous theories

from Japanese but is a common trait in the lan¬

abound about the origin of the Ainu language.

guages of the Eskimo (Yup'ik, Inupiat, Inuktitut)

Linguists have cited similarities and affinity

and other northern and American indigenous

relationships among Japanese, Korean, and

peoples. Does this mean that these are vastly

Altaic languages, and between Ainu and

different languages from Japanese? No—in fact,

Austronesian languages. Structural similarities

they share close structural similarities with Japa¬

have also been pointed out with Siberian,

nese, and a large number of these similarities also

Eskimo, and Native American languages, and

occur in Altaic languages as well as in Ainu. More¬

Mashiho Chiri once thought that Ainu came

over, polysynthetic characteristics, namely, the

from the north via Kamchatka. Nevertheless,

feature that one verb is fonned by combining

scholarship proving or disproving historical

many morphemes, is seen not only in Ainu and

relationships between any of these groups has

Eskimo and other northern and American indig¬

been inconclusive. It has been more than one

enous languages but also in Japanese to some

hundred years since Chamberlain wrote that

extent. Japanese in a sense can be said to be simi¬

"a thorough study of other languages" and

lar to Ainu and Eskimo in terms of its structural

"discoveries of new facts” should illuminate

characteristics, but a conclusion about a genea¬

the mystery,- remarkably, the situation today

logical relationship should not be drawn from the

remains the same. As Chiri stated long ago,

comparison of structural characteristics alone.

the genealogy of the Ainu language is, for the

Japanese and Ainu (and also Eskimo) are
languages with a simple phonological system

time being, unclear. Unfortunately, with the
imminent disappearance of the few remaining

and word forms,- the probability for coincidental

indigenous Ainu speakers, the answers to

similarities is high, because the borrowing of

these questions may never be known.

6/ AINU

LANGUAGE

65

«&pp
vV‘i'.%.;;;.:-'v<'

faiMrti £

iwSi

hHH

®*1

A

inu history itself has a history,

constrains the emergence of an autonomous

and it is not straightforward. Since

Ainu history.

the 1970s the politicization of the
"Ainu problem” has turned the

Ainu
History:
An Overview
Richard Siddle

past into a locus of struggle between the state

premodern period are almost exclusively

history was regarded by the Japanese aca¬

Japanese because the Ainu had no written

demic establishment as merely the history of

language of their own. Historians are there¬

native policy (Takakura 1972) or a largely

fore reduced to viewing Ainu history through

irrelevant prelude to the Japanese develop¬

the distorted lens of Japanese sources while

ment of Hokkaido. Nationalism and cold war

attempting to flesh out a wider picture through

politics effectively isolated Japan from the

the use of archaeological and, in some cases,

continent and encouraged scholars to focus

ethnographical evidence. The images of Ainu

inward on the Japanese archipelago as a natural,

life and customs that were produced by

rather than political, unit. Despite the fact that

Japanese travelers and are known as Ainu-e are

Hokkaido is, in terms of its geography, flora,

valuable sources (fig. 7.1), although such

and fauna, as much part of the Sea of Okhotsk

works also reflect occasionally mistaken and

rim area as the Japanese archipelago, Ainu

prejudicial views of Ainu society.

history as a minor local theme.
Ainu activists and their supporters have

7.1

Uimam Ceremony

formal trade and administrative meet¬
ing held annually between the Ainu
and their Japanese overlords at the

Certain debates have continued to
attract the interest of historians. For example,
what are the origins of the Ainu? What is the

challenged this view since the early 1970s

relationship between the Ainu and the

with their own version of rapacious colonial¬

peoples, known as Emishi, who lived in the

ism and racist aggression by the Japanese state

north of Honshu until the twelfth century?

in the Ainu homeland (Yuki 1980). Others

When did the ethnic formation of the Ainu

Matsumae headquarters in Hakodate.

have attempted to break out of the mold of

people occur? How have acculturation and

As Japanese control replaced the

Japanese history by redefining the coloniza¬

assimilation progressed, and been reversed?

free-market trade of the earlier era,
the uimam was staged to display Ainu

tion of Hokkaido and the dispossession of the

subservience. This illustration is from

Ainu as part of a wider late-nineteenth-century

Origins

Scenes of Ezo painted by Teiryo

pattern of imperialism, recognizing groups of

The fact that populations on both sides of

Kodama in the mid-eighteenth cen¬

indigenous peoples that stretch from North

the Tsugaru Strait were exposed to consider¬

America to Australasia (Siddle 1996). On the

able cultural change and probable migration

other hand, some conservative scholars have

in the prehistoric period makes it difficult to

tury. (HMH)

<

fact that documentary sources for the

and Ainu activists,- until that time, Ainu

history was subsumed within Japanese national

This Ainu-e illustrates the uimam, the

Leaving aside its politicization, Amu
history presents other problems, not least the

reacted to assertions of Ainu nationhood by

pinpoint the origins of the "Ainu people."

reviving old arguments of the Ainu as original

Archaeological evidence from Hokkaido points

or proto-Japanese (Umehara and Hanihara

to longstanding cultural continuities with the

Kakizaki’s work, Portraits of Ezo

1982). In many ways, the tension between

peoples of maritime Siberia and the Amur

Chieftains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

these two overarching meta-narratives still

River basin, as well as links with Honshu and

Ikotoi, Chieftain of Atsukeshi

1843 copy by Teiki Kojima after Hakyo

7/AINU

HISTORY OVERVIEW

67

7.2 Ainu Sword and Hanger
Lacking the ability and materials to
manufacture steel, Ainu obtained swords
from the Japanese. Rather than carrying
them at their belts Japanese-style, they
carried them across their backs or over
their shoulders with specially woven
straps (emushat) made by Ainu women.
In time swords became valued more for
social and ceremonial functions than as
weaponry. (BMA 12.692)

the south (Utagawa 1980b), but by the late

scholars have argued on the basis of place-

thirteenth century the culture complex we

names for the use of the Ainu language

know as Ainu had replaced that of the bearers

throughout northern Japan, but historical

of the Satsumon and Okhotsk cultures.

records only tell us that the language of the

There has been a persistent theory,

Emishi was different without recording it.

encountered even now in Western-language

That the diverse populations grouped under

scholarship, that the Ainu are the remains of

the term "Emishi" spoke only one language,

an aboriginal Japanese population who were

which they shared with the inhabitants of

pushed northward by an expansive Japanese

Hokkaido, also seems unlikely. Rather than

state until finding a final refuge in Hokkaido.

being displaced aboriginal Japanese, it is more

The Ainu are thus equated with the Emishi

probable that the Ainu were the inheritors of

(literally, "barbarians" who were not under

the distinct Satsumon culture of Hokkaido

Japanese political authority) who appear in

and the northern tip of Honshu.

Japanese records of the north between the
seventh and twelfth centuries. Despite the

Trade and Warfare

efforts of scholars to prove racial connections

For the Japanese (usually known as Wajin),

on scanty skeletal evidence, little is known of

who regarded the inhabitants of the northern

population movements during this period It

regions through the prism of Chinese notions

is clear, however, that there were cultural

of civilization and barbarism, the inhabitants of

discontinuities between Hokkaido and

Ezogashima (Hokkaido) were little more than

Honshu, rice cultivation and horses, for

a variety of demon. These barbarians, however,

instance, were not found in Hokkaido. Other

controlled natural resources that the Japanese
desired, and a flourishing trade developed in
furs and sea products. Exiled criminals and
Japanese fleeing from warfare crossed over the
Tsugaru Strait, and by the fifteenth century
Japanese trading settlements were dotted
around the southern tip of the Oshima Penin¬
sula in southern Hokkaido. Both Ainu and
Wajin in this region had come to rely on each
other: the Wajin needed the Ainu to harvest
and exchange the natural products of the
region, while the Ainu relied on Japanese trade
goods—iron, rice, and other items—which
were incorporated into Ainu society as
symbols of wealth and power (fig. 7.2).
In 1456 friction between the Ainu
(known as Ezo) and the newcomers flared
into warfare after a Wajin blacksmith killed an
Ainu in a quarrel over a blunt knife. The
following year, Ainu, led by Koshamain,
destroyed all but two of the settlements and
almost drove the Wajin out of Ezogashima
altogether, initiating a century of intermittent
warfare. A feature of Ainu-Wajin conflicts was
the use by the Japanese side of feigned peace
negotiations, feasting, and offers of compen¬
sation,- after the Ainu had been lulled into a
false sense of security, they would be am¬
bushed and killed. In 1514 the Kakizaki
family had emerged as the leader of the
Japanese in southern Hokkaido, and they
played the leading role in such incidents,
which occurred in 1515, 1529,
and 1536. In 1551 Suehiro
Kakizaki, convinced that

68

HISTORIC PERIOD /R SIDDLE

continued warfare was not beneficial for trade,

To impose control on trade, the

sought an accommodation with the local Ainu.

Matsumae set up a series of trading posts in

The resulting agreement split the profits of

Ainu territory and the Amu were discouraged

trade between Ainu and Wajin leaders, but it

from freely trading where and when they

gave Kakizaki monopolistic control and

wished. Products from the trading posts were

established Japanese territorial control over a

exchanged with Honshu traders who were

small area of southern Hokkaido.
In 1591 the first encounter between a

limited to certain ports where they were
subject to control and taxation. After 1644

European and an Ainu took place. On a visit

Ainu boats were no longer to be seen in

to the palace of Hideyoshi, the Jesuit Ignacio

Tohoku ports, an indication of the success

Morera recorded a meeting with an Ainu

of Matsumae attempts to monopolize trade.

accompanying a Kakizaki delegation from the

The domain was becoming increasingly

north. The man told Morera that he came

dependent on traders from Honshu, espe¬

from from a place called "Ainomoxoriz," a

cially those of Omi (modern Shiga Pre¬

reference to what contemporary Ainu call

fecture). Omi trading houses such as

Ainu mosir. This is the first time that the word

Ryohamagumi and Yawatagumi began setting

Ainu appears in any historical record.

up branch offices in Matsumae from the

The part of the island situated near this

1630s. Motivated by risk and profit, the

place is called Yezo by the Japanese and

traders increasingly began to exploit the

Ainomoxori by the indigenes. According

Ainu. The size of the etotawara, the special

to what we learned from an inhabitant of

small rice bales used in the Ezo trade for

that area they used to travel to other

convenience of transportation, was reduced

islands in the west and also to another land

while rates of exchange were maintained, in

called Rebunkur [Sakhalin] that extends to

effect raising prices for one of the staple

the north of Yezo (S. Kodama 1970c: 15).

Wajin goods on which Ainu living around

Ainu mosir was obviously not a territorial

the trading posts had become dependent.

nation-state in the modern sense of a nation as

Ainu settlements in areas where trade was

an "imagined community" (Anderson 1991);

conducted had become much larger group¬

although the Japanese had a state and the Ainu

ings than in the traditional kotun, and they

did not, a sense of nation was equally lacking

were controlled by powerful leaders who

among both Ainu and Japanese during the

gained their wealth and status from the trade.

premodern period. The Ainu mosir of 1591 was

As tensions mounted, disputes between

not the expression of an ethnic homeland but

groups sometimes escalated into armed

more likely "the place where the Ainu people

conflicts. Japanese historical sources indicate

live." Nevertheless, it is clear from other

that the feud between two powerful Ainu

records that Ainu distinguished between their

groups, the Menashkur and the Shumkur,

lands and Wajin territory.

which took place between 1648 and 1668 in

In 1599 the Kakizaki family took the

what is now the Hidaka region, was a major

7.3 Shakushain

name of Matsumae, and in 1604 their small

source of political instability. Although the

In 1669 Shakushain, leader of the

domain was incorporated into the Tokugawa

trading and gold-panning interests of the

state as a minor fief. The black seal edict of

Matsumae were threatened, they could do
little more than offer to mediate.

Shibechari (modern Shizunai) Ainu,
organized attacks against trading
posts and vessels, and hundreds of

Ieyasu Tokugawa that legitimized the

Wajin (Japanese) were killed. Several

Matsumae domain, following an earlier edict

hundred Hidaka Ainu then marched

of Hideyoshi in 1593, limited Matsumae

west to confront the Matsumae near

political authority to the domain. The rest of

there probably also existed a more general

the island and surrounding areas remained a

sense of commonality among those who

their domain in Hakodate but they
were defeated, and Shakushain and
his chief supporters were assassinated.

Although Ainu political organization
was based on the local or regional group,

foreign land, known as Ezochi (Ainu-land).

spoke the Ainu language or shared the same

The same edict granted a trade monopoly to

cultural traditions. Identity for the Ainu

the Matsumae. Although the Matsumae

appears to have been framed primarily in

domain possessed rich fishing grounds, there

terms of their customs (or religion, because

was little agricultural potential, so trade

the two were virtually synonymous). Many

remained vital for the economy. Rice (more

observers recorded the resistance and distress

than 55,000 bales annually) and other

shown by the Ainu after many of their

foodstuffs were imported from the Tokugawa

customs, including tattooing, the wearing of

state to Matsumae, which shipped back the

beards, and the bear ceremony, were banned

products of Ezochi in return.

by the authorities in an attempt to promote

7 / AINU

HISTORY OVERVIEW

69

7.4

Invasion of Ezo by Russians

Russian explorers and sea-otter
hunters began encroaching on Ainu

assimilation after 1799,- most feared the

in 1754. In 1774 Kunashiri became the

resulting wrath of the gods that would come

trading territory of the merchant Kyubei

territories in Sakhalin and the Kuriles

if they abandoned their religion. Even though

Hidaya, although the establishment of

in the early eighteenth century.

Ainu identity may have actually been rein¬

permanent commercial operations in this area

forced by Japanese practices of prohibiting

was impossible until 1782 due to the intransi¬

Ainu from adopting Japanese language or

gence and power of the local Ainu leaders.

Shumushu in the northern Kuriles was
colonized by Russians in the 1730s,
and by 1749 most Ainu and Kamchadal
natives had been baptized as Orthodox

customs, such historical events as Shakushain's

Christians. As Russians penetrated

War nevertheless illustrate that this outside

trading territories, now numbering around

force did not compel the Ainu to unite on the

seventy and known as basho, began to come

basis of a common identity.

under the direct control of mainland traders.

farther south, the taxes they imposed
on fur angered the southern Kurile
Ainu, who rose up and massacred a

From the early eighteenth century the

Russian party on Urup Island in 1771,

This conflict broke out in 1669. Led by

freeing this area from Russian control

Shakushain, leader of the Ainu of Shibechari

Matsumae were deeply in debt to the

for a brief period. This woodblock print,

(modern Shizunai), many Ainu attacked

mainland merchants. The Matsumae hoped

which shows Ainu and Russian forces

Domain expenses were increasing and the

trading posts and vessels over much of Ezochi,

that letting merchant contractors operate the

called "Publication on the Ainu People

killing hundreds of Wajin. The Ainu army, a

basho after paying a fee would increase trade

of Japan”; its place of publication,

few hundred strong, then marched west to

volume and profits and therefore tax receipts.

date, or the reason for its creation are

confront the Matsumae near their domain,

This arrangement gradually developed over

preparing for battle, is from a series

not known. (PEM E75190/23.350)

but here they were defeated (fig. 7.3). The

the course of the eighteenth century and has

Matsumae initiated a pacification campaign to

come to be known as the basho ukeoi (subcon¬

regain control of their domain, and during

tracted trading post) system. To pay these

feigned peace negotiations later in the year

taxes and fees (along with forced loans to the
Matsumae, of which there was little chance of
repayment), the traders had to move away
from barter trade to a more rationalized
system. This was aided by the development of
mainland agriculture, which led to a subse¬
quent increase in demand for fish fertilizer
and an interest in the fisheries of Ezochi.
According to a contemporary source, by 1740
more than half of the rice paddies in western
Japan were using fish-meal fertilizer from
Ezochi, and goods from the region entered
international trade routes through Nagasaki
(M. Kaiho 1979). These developments,
introduced gradually until the nineteenth
century, were made possible by the systematic
exploitation of fishing grounds using mer¬
chant capital, technology, and management,
as well as Ainu labor. Contractors introduced
advanced fishing methods and equipment,
built processing facilities and barracks for the
Ainu laborers, and shipped the products

Shakushain was assassinated. One result of this

directly to markets in Kansai (Howell 1995).

political turmoil was that Matsumae exerted

Risks were high, and high fees and forced

control over previously autonomous regional

loans to the Matsumae put pressure on the

groups in western and central Hokkaido,

contractors to make the highest profits

including the Ainu of Ishikari, who were led by

possible. One result of this system was cruel

Haukase and had refused to participate in the

treatment of the Ainu.

fighting. Ainu communities in the outlying

70

Emphasis had shifted from obtaining the

areas to the north and east, however, still

products of Ainu labor through trade to the

remained independent or maintained a tribute

direct exploitation of that labor itself. Ainu

relationship with Matsumae. With the rise in

around the basho, who were dependent on

Matsumae dominance, the trading posts and

Wajin goods and whose leaders derived

trade vessels gradually began to penetrate into

authority from their relationship with the

their territories as well, reaching Karafuto

basho, were coerced into working for rations

(Sakhalin) in 1679 and the island of Kunashiri

and goods. Conditions varied, but in the worst

HISTORIC PERIOD / R SIDDLE

bcisbo the situation was often harsh. In 1789,

stationed garrisons around the coast and

after some years of suffering an exceptionally

intervened in the Ainu trade to alleviate the

cruel regime, Ainu attacked and killed seventy-

worst injustices, but most Wajin still lived in

one Wajin on Kunashiri and in the Nemuro

the Matsumae domain or at the various

area. This final act of armed resistance was

fishing stations around Hokkaido.

eventually suppressed by the Matsumae with

When the Russian threat receded the

the help of local Ainu leaders under their

Bakufu abandoned Ezochi and handed it

political control. After an investigation, thirty-

back to the Matsumae in 1821, and the

seven Ainu were executed at Nokkamappu.

border area reverted to its previous ambigu¬

The appearance of Russians in the

ous status. The Matsumae and the mer¬

north around this time meant that Ezochi

chants, on the other hand, were keen to

and the Ainu became a matter of utmost

reassert their economic control in Ezochi as

concern in Tokugawa political circles (fig.

well as their authority over Ainu labor in the

7.4). In 1792 Adam Laxman, an official from

fishing stations. The assimilation policy was

the court of Catherine II, landed at Nemuro

scrapped, and forced labor and resettlement

requesting the opening of trade relations

became a feature of Ainu life. Ainu labor was

with Japan. Although he was rebuffed, the

used for road-building, transportation, and

Russian threat to Tokugawa's tenuous control

servicing the fisheries, in addition to direct

over the northern territories bolstered argu¬

economic production. Ainu were brought

ments for the annexation of Ezochi. In 1798

down from the mountains to work on the
coast or were transferred between basbo run
by the same trader, and the sexual exploita¬
tion of Ainu women by Wajin migrant
workers became commonplace. The recruit¬
ment of labor was accomplished by the use
of physical coercion if necessary, leaving the
elderly and infirm behind. These practices
were all recorded in detail in the journals of a
sympathetic Japanese explorer, Takeshiro
Matsuura (1818-88), who conducted six
official surveying missions in Ezochi and
Karafuto (southern Sakhalin).
Diseases introduced by the migrant
workers also contributed to the destruction of
Ainu society (see Walker, this volume). As the
Ainu ceased to be the main economic
producers in Ezochi, the movement of
immigrants increased, encouraged by the
easing of travel restrictions and tolls. As these

7.5
7.5

7.6
Ainu Northern Regions Before

1868 (after Siddle 1996)

7.6

Hokkaido and Surroundings,

1869-1945 (after Siddle 1996)

immigrants began to yield political power in

the Bakufu (a military caste that enforced the

Ezochi by the 1850s, the hands-off policy that

shogunate's rule) sent a large expedition to

the Tokugawa government had previously

Ezochi, including Sakhalin and the Kuriles,-

maintained toward the Matsumae domain

in 1799 over Matsumae objections, the

began to break down, and in 1 855 the Bakufu

Tokugawa government annexed part of the

reasserted control over the area after the

region, simultaneously introducing a policy

Treaty of Shimoda established the Russo-

that aimed to "civilize" the Ainu by convert¬

Japanese border between Etorofu and Uruppu.

ing them (often forcibly) to Japanese customs
and lifestyle. By 1807 all Ezochi had been

Colonization and Dispossession

placed under direct Bakufu control through

With the Meiji Restoration of 1868 and the

offices established in Matsumae and

establishment of the Colonization Commis¬

Hakodate (fig. 7.5). This was the first time

sion (Kaitakusbi) in 1869, Ezochi was renamed

centralized Japanese political authority was

Hokkaido and transformed into an internal

extended to the whole region, but it was too

colony of the new Japanese state (figs. 7.6,

vast and rugged to administer in the same

7.7), a strategic "empty land" to be settled by

way as other Tokugawa lands. The Bakufu

Japanese immigration and developed along

7/AINU HISTORY OVERVIEW

74

capitalist lines,- both of these policies required

thus doomed to die out in the survival of the

the dispossession of the Ainu as a prerequi¬

fittest. As officials commented in 1 883, the

site. First Ainu land was appropriated as terra

Ainu had no history:

nullius under the Land Regulation Ordinance

From olden times [the Ainu] . . . have no

(Jisho kisoku) of 1872,- the salmon and deer

knowledge of time. If they see snow they

upon which the Ainu depended were soon

know that winter has come,- if they see

depleted by uncontrolled exploitation,- and
the land was surveyed and partitioned for

flowers they realize that spring has
arrived,- herrings mean it must be summer,when the salmon come they think it is

settlement. Mass immigration, a market

7 7

Modern Hokkaido

(after Siddle 1996)

autumn. They have no fixed place, when

economy, and administration by local officials

they go out they wander aimlessly . . .

who answered to a distant power created a

they have no writing, no methods of

new colonial society in F4okkaido. The

teaching, no inherited sensibility.

authorities began in the 1880s to round up

(Takakura 1972: 524)

and relocate Ainu communities onto reserva¬

A humanitarian movement to halt the

tions, of sorts, to clear them out of rich lands

physical extermination of the "dying race"

designated for agricultural settlement and to

resulted in the enactment in 1899 of the

make them easier to control. Ainu communi¬

F4okkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act

ties from Sakhalin and the Kuriles were also

(Hokkaido kyudojin hogo bo). Linder this act the

relocated, the former after the Russians took

Ainu were granted small plots of land in an

control in 1875 and the latter in 1884. Life on

attempt to turn them into farmers,- assimila¬

these reservations was grim, and in some

tion was also encouraged through a special
system of native education. By the beginning
of the twentieth century, the activities of
scholars, educators, colonial officials, and
journalists ensured that the image of an
inferior "dying race" informed both govern¬
ment policy and public opinion.
Traditional ways of life survived into the
Meiji period until the resources of land, fish,
and game upon which this lifestyle depended
were appropriated or destroyed by the
development of FJokkaido,- by the early
twentieth century most Ainu were sunk in
chronic destitution and only barely managing
to survive. Poverty and isolation, coupled
with the lack of education, money, or any
other resources, hampered the Ainu from
mounting any concerted response to the
social stresses created by rapid change in the
new colonial situation. Isolated acts of
individual violence were the most conspicu¬
ous attempts to come to terms with their
situation, but a few Ainu succeeded in
overcoming many of the constraints imposed
by the colonial order to obtain an education

cases the communities were moved yet again.

or even achieve economic prosperity.

By the end of the century, the 17,000 Ainu
accounted for around 2 percent of the

Ainu Resistance

population of Fdokkaido (Emori 1987: 126).

In the 1920s and 1930s younger Ainu like

Modernization was accompanied by

72

Fdokuto iboshi, Yukie Chiri, and Torazo Ega

new concepts of “race" and "nation" that

became the forerunners of a movement to

became the basis for relations between Wajin

better the condition of those they perceived

and Ainu. The barbarian was transformed into

as iltari, "their people." Lacking resources and

a member of a primitive race, a wandering

dependent largely on Wajin allies in positions

savage incapable of using the land or pro¬

of authority or Christians associated with the

gressing to higher levels of civilization and

British missionary John Batchelor, they sought

HISTORIC

PERIOD / R

SIDDLE

assimilation within the dominant society.

new Ainu politic. Influenced by domestic

Their movement therefore concentrated on self-

and international movements for civil and

help, the eradication of alcoholism, the revision

human rights and the struggles of indigenous

of the 1899 Hokkaido Former Aborigines

peoples elsewhere, young radicals challenged

Protection Act, and the refutation of the image

the comfortable institutional position of the

of a "dying race." In 1930 the first organization

Utari Kyokai, the successor of the Ainu

for all Hokkaido Ainu, the Ainu Kyokai (Ainu

Kyokai, as a distributor of government

Association) was formed. Although headed by a

largesse, and they also launched an attack

Wajin bureaucrat and operated as a government

on the assimilation policies of the govern¬

program, the Ainu Kyokai provided an impor¬

ment itself. In common with other indig¬

tant forum for like-minded young Ainu from

enous populations around the world, cultural

previously isolated communities to come

symbols were activated to encourage a sense

together. Despite their ultimate objective of

of identity around which to mobilize politi¬

assimilation, these men and women remained

cally. A flag, a history, and a homeland

proud of their heritage and helped create a new,

(Ainu mosir) legitimized the existence of

though fragile, sense of Ainu unity.

the Ainu people and underscored their claims

The failure of their efforts to assimilate

for increased access to wealth and power.

became clear in the decades after the collapse

By 1984 Ainu demands for recognition by

of the Empire in 1945. Local prejudice

and participation in Japanese society were

continued to deny those identified as Ainu

codified in a proposal to replace the Protec¬

the opportunity to participate equally in

tion Act, and the movement was greatly

Japan's economic and political renewal. Many

stimulated in 1986 by anger over the declara¬

Ainu were reduced to working in tourism,

tion of then Prime Minister Nakasone that

one of the few avenues available for them to

Japan had no "racial minorities." In 1987

earn a cash income. Tourism aroused complex

Ainu demands were aired at the Llnited

emotions among Ainu,- many saw it as degrad¬

Nations, and the Protection Act was finally

ing or as encouraging the continuation of

repealed in 1997 and replaced with a cultural

prejudice against them The production of

promotion law (Ainu Shinpo). With the

tourist art had, in fact, been going on for a

demise of the Protection Act and the associ¬

long time,- even during the days of the basho

ated notion of a "dying race,” a chapter in

some Ainu had carved articles for sale, and

Ainu history was finally closed. Although

the carving of bears had been encouraged

many Ainu remain unsatisfied that this law

as a self-help exercise in communities like

would produce real progress because it did

Chikabumi in the prewar period.

not address political, resource, or territorial

Although the Ainu Kyokai continued,

rights and did not explicitly grant the Ainu

the momentum and vitality of the prewar

indigenous status, it has nevertheless opened

movement were never regained. However, in

a new relationship between the Ainu and the

the 1970s, radical social and political currents

Japanese government. It thus appears that a

in Japan contributed to the emergence of a

new era of Ainu history has begun.

7/AINU

HISTORY OVERVIEW

73

E

arly historical records of the

8/Early Ainu
Contacts
with the
Japanese
Isao Kjkuchi

considered: first, the history of the term "Ezo",

Yamato nation, a state of Japan that

and second, the formation of Ainu identity.

ruled a large area from Kinai (near

During the Edo period (which began in 1615),

today's Kyoto) from A.D. 552 to

the terms "Ezo" and "Ainu" were becoming

710, identify the people living in the north¬

synonymous, but the fact that the ancestors of

ernmost part of the Japanese archipelago as

the Ainu were collectively called Ezo does not

Ezo. Written in Kanji (ideographic characters

necessarily mean that they were a group with

adapted from the Chinese system), this term

an ethnic identity at that time. The name

differentiated these people from Emishi (a

"Aino/Ainu" appears in historical literature in

word describing natives of northern Honshu

the last half of the eighteenth century as a self-

that was sometimes used to refer to Hokkaido

ascribed ethnic name. It thus appears that by

natives) and Honcho-jin (Japanese). Ezo had

the eighteenth century the native people of

political meaning throughout the medieval

today's Hokkaido preferred Ainu and were

and early modern periods, beginning with

offended by being referred to as Ezo.

these seventh-century references in

In ancient Japan, the character for Ezo

chronicles of the Yamoto nation and ending

was often pronounced with its alternative

when the Tokugawa Shogunate identified the

reading of Emishi. Emishi was also a man's

people of Ezo as aborigines in 1 856 and the

name, one used especially to designate a brave

Meiji government changed the name of their

man, but when Emishi was pronounced with a

lands from Ezogashima to Hokkaido in 1869.

provincial accent, it became Ebisu, which

Abolishing the official use of Ezo signified

meant a violent group of people. There is no

8.1 Historic Map of Northern
Tqhoku and Hokkaido
This map, produced by the Edo
Shogunate government, shows its
regional administration centers for
Ezo, ca. 1600.

assimilation: Ezo people were supposed to

doubt that this linguistic ambivalence had an

become Japanese. With this action Japanese

effect on attitudes toward the people who

governments attempted to shore up their

inhabited the Tohoku area of northern Honshu

northern border, projecting a more unified

and were not integrated into the political

presence to the Russians, who had begun to

world of the Japanese (Yamato), who had by

expand south into Sakhalin at the end of the

then established a centralized state. The

eighteenth century (!. Kikuchi 1994,- see also

Yamato people were an immigrant group who

M. Kaiho 1987, T. Takahashi 1963).

came from the Korean Peninsula after the early

Can one assume that the people called

74

Yayoi period (250 B.C.-A.D. 250), while the

Ezo in ancient times are today's Ainu popula¬

Emishi were longtime residents who dated

tion? There are two complicated issues to be

back to the Jomon period (see Yamaura and

HISTORIC PERIOD/ I.

KIKUCHI

8.2

A Fishery Scene

Ushiro, this volume). In the eyes of the Yamato

national culture, the Emishi remained outside

from

Ezo Country

people, the Emishi must have appeared foreign,

this national framework. By definition, if the

for they had a vastly different language,

Emishi were to be assimilated as Japanese,

culture, and religion.

they could no longer be Emishi. Including

As the Japanese state expanded north¬
ward. a maritime trade developed with
the Ainu for fish products and such
Asian goods as cloth, metal, and glass.
While Japanese were eager to obtain
seal and sea-lion products, eagle
feathers needed for arrow-fletching,

The existence of similar material cultures

non-Emishi people, for instance, Ezo/Ainu,

shared by peoples from the Ishikari River

under the political classification of Emishi

valley in Hokkaido south to the Tohoku

would not inconvenience the Japanese.

and other northern materials, ocean¬

district has been established by archaeological

That the people who lived in the

going Ainu traders from Ezo (as Hok¬

data. The fact that many Ainu-language place-

northernmost part of their archipelago were

kaido was known until 1868) sup¬

names are still used in those parts of Emishi

described as Emishi reveals Japanese attitudes

plied the Japanese with materials

that were once identified with the Tohoku—

toward foreigners and the state of its policy in

the north and northeast in particular—bolsters

relation to East Asia. For example, in the

Asian mainland. This undated illustra¬

the theory that the Emishi, like the Ezo, were

middle of the seventh century a Japanese

tion by Teishin Kodama shows Japa¬

Ainu. Although the word "Emishi" may also

mission to the rulers of the Chinese Tang

have been a self-ascribed name, it is not yet

dynasty presented Michinoku Emishi (people

obtained from the Kurile and Sakhalin
Ainu and from the native people of the

nese and Ainu vessels exchanging
fish at sea. (HMH)

certain exactly what they called themselves.

from northern Tohoku) to the Chinese as

From their own point of view, the word may

Japanese subjects. This reveals Japan's desire

just have been a name used to distinguish

to emulate Imperial China by modeling itself

themselves from the Yamato.

after the Sui and Tang nations. Although the

The Emishi were a group with a differ¬

Emishi who resisted Japanese expansion were

ent ethnicity and culture who lived east and

to be suppressed, they were nonetheless useful

north of the Yamato people. The rulers of the

as political pawns to enhance the authority of

centralized state now called Japan regarded

the Japanese ruler. The concept of Ezo as a

the Emishi as outsiders who did not acknowl¬

subject state ruled by Japan greatly affected

edge the emperor's rule and accordingly, for

the Japanese people's political and cultural

political reasons, were defined as uncivilized

awareness of the Ezo for generations.

people. Those who lived within the frame¬

In the middle of the twelfth century,

work of the Japanese nation were thought of

the way to read the character for Ezo clearly

as citizens of the country, regardless of race

changed from Emishi/Ebisu to Ezo, which

and ethnic origins. But although these

became the term used to refer to the resi¬

Japanese developed a unified identity that

dents of the Tsugaru region of Tohoku and

eventually coalesced into a single ethnic

Hokkaido. What caused this change? The

8/EARLY CONTACTS WITH

JAPAN

75

ancient Japanese nation was aggressive in its

then called Ezo, developed the Satsumon

campaign to subjugate the Emishi from the

culture, which was known for its ceramic ware

end of the eighth century to the beginning of

and based on salmon- and trout-fishing with

the ninth century, evidenced by the punitive

some hunting and gathering—practices that

expedition against the Ainu led by

fit the ecosystem specific to Hokkaido. As

Tamuramaro Sakanoue in A.D. 801. After this

any common identity as Emishi faded away,

period, the belligerent strategy was switched

the Ezo in Hokkaido and the nation of Japan

to one of appeasement, a policy whose effect

were connected largely by local power

was to play one group against another.

brokers at the border of their two cultures

During this period, some Emishi in the

(figs. 8.2, 8.3).

Tohoku region took steps to become Japa¬

8.3

By the end of the twelfth century, the

nese. They were called Fushu or Ifu, and were

dominant Fujiwara clan, which had acted as

in essence people who became naturalized

managers or rulers of the Ezo, was defeated

Japanese,- some powerful Fushu clans married

by Yoritomo Minamoto, a member of a

aristocrats from the capital, Kyoto, who were

samurai clan who founded the Kamakura

stationed in Tohoku, and these clans became

Shogunate. Thereafter, the Tohoku region

powerful in the region as a conduit between

was governed by a vassal of the Kamakura,

the central government and northern societ¬

and all elements of the Emishi culture and

ies. The Abe clan, who dominated the

local tradition disappeared, only the northern

Kitakami River basin (Okuroku-gun) in the

part of Tohoku (current Aomori Prefecture)

middle of the eleventh century, and the

maintained close relations with the Ezo. A

The Japanese Ezo Fishery

With Ainu uprisings suppressed by
samurai and the Matsumae in charge
of Ezo trade, Japanese fish-processing
plants were established in southeast¬
ern Ezo to exploit salmon rivers and
inshore fisheries. Dried fish, roe, oil,
fish starch, and preparation of the fish
fertilizer needed for Honshu’s rice
paddies produced good profits for the
Japanese owners, but not for the Ainu,
who lost their livelihood, were forced
into indentured service, and saw their
villages overrun by alien populations.
This photograph of a Japanese fish¬
processing plant was taken at Akkeshi,
Hokkaido, in 1871 by G. Noguchi, a
photographer associated with Charles
Appleton Longfellow during his sojourn
in Japan in 1871-73. (NPS/LNHS)

Fujiwara clan, who inherited the Abe clan's

local administrator from the Ando clan of

power, are examples of such powerful

Tosaminato in the Tsugaru area, appointed by

families. Of them Hidehira Fujiwara was

the Hojo clan, controlled all trade with the

appointed Chinjufu Shogunate/Lord of

Hokkaido Ezo as well as regional affairs.

Mutsu, a national post, and he exercised great

Although the Fujiwara clan's power was seized

power as a ruler of the Tohoku area. The

by the Kamakura Shogunate and the Hojo

source of his wealth was trading to the

clan, the Ando clan became a direct successor

Japanese in such goods as eagle feathers, seal

of the Fujiwara and Abe clans in terms of

skins, horses, and placer gold, which he

control of northern trade and in fact regarded

obtained from the northern residents.

itself as a descendant of the Abe clan. Their

Between the ninth and twelfth centuries,
the ancient Emishi culture split and took two

76

prosperity during the Kamakura (1 185-1336)
and Muromachi (1 336-1573) periods is

largely different paths: the Tohoku people

indicated by the wealth of foreign goods found

became Fushu and were integrated into

at the Ando residence site, which was recently

Japanese society, while those in Hokkaido, by

excavated in Tosaminato,- these imported items

HISTORIC PERIOD/I

KIKUCHI

8.5 Lacquered Cups
and Saucer Stands
Japanese-made cups and saucer
stands, called tuki by the Ainu, had
a central role in Ainu ceremonies in
which millet beer or sake was shared
by men and gods. Tuki became an
important Ainu-Japanese trade com¬
modity and were one of many foreign
items incorporated into Ainu culture
and belief. They continue to be used
in ceremonies today. (BMS C18752,
C18755, C18756, C18757)

8.4 Trade Goods

included white and celadon porcelain and

Karako, and Watarito. Hinomoto were

and Ceremonial Life

Chinese coins. During the development of

residents of the Pacific coast of Hokkaido

Lacquerware—ranging from large storage

trade on the Sea of Japan, Tosaminato—

and had connections with eastern Hokkaido

many types of trade goods obtained by

where Hokkaido's kelp, dried salmon, and sea

and the Kuriles. Karako were thought to live

Ainu from the Japanese. This detail from

otter skin were received—played an impor¬

on the coast of the Sea of Japan and be

a mid-nineteenth-century painting of an

tant role in managing trade with Korea,

related to peoples of Sakhalin and northeast

China, and Hokkaido (which was called

Asia. The bodies of Hinomoto and Karako

vessels to drinking cups—was one of

iyomante (bear-sending) ceremony by
Byozan Hirasawa (full view, fig. 9.8)
shows many of the large containers that

Ezogashima at the time). The economically

people were described as ogrelike. They ate

the Ainu considered "treasures.” (HML)

strong Ando clan called itself "Hinomoto

animals and fish, were unaware of farming,

Shogun" during the Muromachi period, hinting

and could not communicate in the Japanese

8.6 Mutual Influence
Trade had impact on the Japanese as well
as on the Ainu. Along with marine and

at its desire to be an independent power in

language. In the minds of medieval people,

eastern Japan.

who believed in the virtue of the center, the

other natural products, Japanese received

What did the Ezo people on Ezoga¬

farther away from the capital, the less clean

attush garments woven from elm bark by

shima with whom the Ando clan traded look

things became, and the ogre represented this

Ainu women. This drawing by Shimanojo
Murakami, from Curious Sights of Ezo

Island (1799), shows Japanese women

like? According to texts on the picture scroll

impurity, which would bring misfortune to

Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba compiled in I 356 by

humans. Thus, it was natural that the Ezo,

wearing tough and durable attush for

Enchu of Suwa Shrine at Shinano, three types

who lived on the border or even outside of

agricultural work. (HML)

of Ezo were living on Ezogashima: Hinomoto,

Japan, were considered to be inhuman ogres.

8/EARLY CONTACTS WITH

JAPAN

77

8.7

Cloth Mittens

Cotton cloth was one of the most
popular Japanese items imported to
Ezo. These mittens, collected by
Romyn Hitchcock in 1888 in Piratori,
were probably made from a used
Japanese kimono. The cloth has one
of the many blue resist-dyed patterns
that were popular in the mid¬
nineteenth century. (NMNH 150688)

The Watarito lived on the Oshima
Peninsula in southern Hokkaido, and are
described in texts as traders who crossed the

they promoted themselves to the top of the

Tsugaru Strait to conduct business in Tosaminato.

Tatenushi class and seized trading rights with

Judging from descriptions of maw (sacred shaved

the Ezo. With the emergence of a centralized

sticks) and poisoned arrows, the Watarito were

government led by the Toyotomi and Tokugawa

undoubtedly the early modern-era Ainu.

Shogunates, however, the Kakizaki clan was

Those who moved to the area after the fall of

forced to integrate into the system as their

the Fujiwara clan or were deported by the

subjects. The Kakizaki clan, which changed its

Kamakura Shogunate to Ezogashima were also

name to the Matsumae clan, was granted trade

called Watarito, and traders from Honshu must

rights with Ezo by the Tokugawa Shogunate

have been part of the group. While southern

and was named its daimyo (feudal lord) in the

Hokkaido was occupied by people of various

far north (figs. 8.3-8.7). Ezogashima, an area

backgrounds, the Ando clan of Tosaminato

where people with vastly different backgrounds

controlled the entire area.

had once lived together in a trade entrepot,

Oshima Peninsula created tension with
the Ezo and led to the Koshamain uprising in

78

forces, the Kakizaki clan obtained ruling status:
although they were vassals of the Ando clan,

finally was occupied by only the Matsumae clan
and the Ainu people. This can be seen as a

1457. The year before the revolt, the Ando clan

forced repudiation of the successful coexistence

moved its headquarters to the Oga Peninsula of

of multiple groups among the Watarito Ezo in

Dewa. After the battle with the Koshamain

the medieval period.

HISTORIC PERIOD/I

KIKUCHI

A

lthough the Ainu did not

culture of the Ainu as documented more

practice painting, mostly due to

recently. Some paintings of the Ainu reveal

their religion, several sets of

that the artists had no firsthand knowledge of

paintings nevertheless exist that

Ainu-e:
A Historical
Review
Toshikazu Sasaki

the Ainu,- these materials reflect the sbcnno view

illustrate the Ainu lifestyle from the eigh¬

of a different race, and their images of the

teenth to the mid-nineteenth century,- the

Ainu suggest that these people were not

subjects are generally limited to Ainu culture,

widely known to the artists who created them.

manners, and customs. These works, usually

Japanese pictorial art historically

called Ainu-e, were painted by shamo (a word

concerns itself with various styles of paint¬

derived from Ainu sisam meaning "neighbor",-

ings depicting all aspects of Japanese life.

it was originally used by the Ainu as a

Because Ainu-e on their most basic level are

derogatory term for the Japanese, but after

artworks depicting Ainu life, it might seem

the eighteenth century it lost its negative

logical to categorize them as genre paintings:

meaning) who had frequent contacts with the

however, they are not truly genre pictures

Ainu. One of the earliest Ainu-e appeared in

because they were not created by the Ainu

1720 (Kyoho 5) with the publication of Ezo-

themselves as depictions of their own

sbi, an illustrated gazetteer of Ezo compiled

lifeways. Because they were created by non-

by the celebrated Japanese historian and man

Ainu, certain elements of falsehood and

of letters Hakuseki Arai (1656-1725). Ezo-sbi

prejudice are reflected in some Ainu-e. Some

contains a wealth of Ainu ethnographic

scholars of Ainu culture suggest that the

material obtained through records compiled

Ainu-e genre can be divided into two
distinct groups based on the motives of the
artists. The first group consists of works
that sought to record ethnographic details
about an unfamiliar people for those who
could not observe them firsthand. These

Tfg-M/

artists based their paintings on direct
experience of Ainu life, documentary
sources, and real Ainu people, situations,
and artifacts. The second group approached
the Ainu primarily from an artistic point of
view, discovering in them a fascinating and
exotic subject that offered artistic challenges
and opportunities. This dichotomy is
problematic, because artistically superior
Ainu-e can provide valuable ethnographic
material, and carefully researched works
can certainly be artistically rendered. This
essay is primarily concerned with those
works of high artistic merit.

9.1 Pictorial Biography of

by the Japanese Matsumae clan, which ruled

Prince Shotoku

Hokkaido at that time from their seat in

Ezo Illustrated Before Ezo-shi

today's Hakodate region.

Among the most interesting paintings of this

The earliest depictions of the Ainu are
found in the first renditions of the

Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku,

The term Ainu-e has been used broadly

genre produced before the Ezo-sbi are those

illustrated accounts of a seventh-

to define any painting that depicts the Ezo

century hero, which appeared as early

(Ainu) without concern for dates, subjects, or

(574-622), a heroic figure whose seventh-

artists. Since the medieval period of Japanese

century exploits attracted artists for nearly a

as 1069 in a version of this series
painted by Hata no Chitei. This illustra¬

dedicated to the legend of Shotoku Taishi

tion from a screen painting of this

history, the term "Ezo" equates fully with

millennium Many illustrated versions of the

subject shows attention to cultural

"Ainu," but in more ancient uses Ezo did not

Sbotoku taishi denryaku, or collected tales of

themes like clothing, hairstyles, and
physical features. (TNM)

necessarily refer to the Ainu but was used to

Prince Shotoku, comprise the series Pictorial

describe many non-Japanese minority groups

Biography of Prince Sbotoku, starting with a

of the surrounding area, including the Lll'ta,

version painted by Hata no Chitei in 1069

Orok, and Nivkhi. Many of the earliest

(Enkyu 1), which is now in the collection of

artworks within the Ainu-e genre, broadly

the Tokyo National Museum. Collectively

defined, do not always provide information

these are presented in a biographical style

that can be reconciled with traditions and

that differentiates them from many other

9/AINU-E HISTORICAL REVIEW

79

works that sought simply to glorify the Prince

the Kamakura era (1 1 85-1 336) to celebrate

Shotoku legend (fig. 9.1). Shotoku's legend¬

the anniversary of Prince Shotoku's death are

ary role in suppressing a revolt directed by

different from the work of 1069 by Hata no

Ayakasu, a leader of the Ezo, was a popular

Chitei. It is hard to say whether the Ezo

subject in the Pictorial Biography of Prince

illustrated in Hata no Chitei s piece are Ainu

Shotoku. In one version, "The Subjugation of

or people of other tribes, although they do

Ezo by Prince Shotoku" is portrayed as an

possess some elements of Ainu ethnicity. By

achievement of the ten-year-old Prince,

contrast, the Ezo illustrations from the

embellishing upon the "Events During the

Kamakura period, especially the piece done in

Tenth Year of Emperor Bidatsu's Reign (572-

1 324, are distinctly Ainu. Although the

585)" in Nihon shoki (Chronicles of Japan),

portrayals of the Ezo in these three picture

tales of ancient Japan from its origins to 696,

scrolls have a distinctly Chinese character, it

which was compiled in 720. In this painting

is possible to find Ainu elements in the

Ayakasu is seen swearing his loyalty to the

details. The Prince Shotoku series continued

emperor before Mt. Miwa in Nara. Although

to be painted through the Edo period (1615-

the depictions of the Ezo and their leader for

1 868), but the pieces that offer the clearest

the most part conform to contemporary

contemporary view of the Ezo materials were

stereotypical images of these people, a close

painted during the Muromachi period (1336—

analysis reveals certain accurately depicted

1573). The British Museum has excellent

aspects of Ezo manners and customs.

examples of this series from this period, and

Hata no Chitei painted the oldest

although they are fragmentary, their depic¬
tions of the Ezo are highly informative.
Ryuzo Torii was the first scholar to
examine depictions of the Ezo in the Pictorial
Biography of Prince Shotoku in relation to Ainu
manners and customs (Torii 1926). He asserted
that the version in the Jogu Temple in Ibaraki
showed the most ancient manners and customs
of the Ainu and that this painting was the most
trustworthy substitute for the lost originals of
the Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba (see below). Bol¬
stered by Kyosuke Kindaichi's support (1926)
for his views on the authenticity of the Jogu
Temple painting, Torii (1926) maintained that
this rendition is the oldest Ainu-e. Sakuzaemon
Kodarna (1971) disagreed that the painting
depicts Ainu manners and customs but
expressed no doubt that it is the oldest Ezo
painting. It has been my contention (Sasaki

9.2 Seisuiji en'gi

known depictions of Ezo people including the

1972) that the Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku

(History of Seisui Temple)

screen in the Tokyo National Museum,

be viewed as the oldest Ainu-e, which renders

This early illustration depicts the story
of Tamuramaro Sakanoue (758-811)
and the origins of Seisui Temple. The

referenced above. Illustrated therein are three

these materials invaluable as a starting point for

half-naked, beardless men with their long hair

studying Ainu culture.
The number of early Ainu-e outside the

painting shows Japanese forces bat¬

tied in hack,- one man wears a skirt made of

tling a rebellious northern people who

bird feathers. The next depiction of Ezo

Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku series is quite

people, also held by the Tokyo National

limited, which only adds to the interest in

are portrayed here without any recog¬
nizable Ainu characteristics. Rather
than being based on ethnographic

Museum, is a piece in the Prince Shotoku

these depictions of the Ezo. In chronological

reality, these images conform to ideas

series dated to 1305 (Kagen 3). Several works

order, the most important scrolls for their

about demons and goblins popular in

dating from around I 323, considered to he

descriptions and images of northern ethnic

the 700th anniversary of Prince Shotoku's

groups are Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba (Pictures

death, still exist, including one at the temple

and commentaries in the Suwa Daimyojin

the sixteenth century. (TNM)

at Shitenno dated 1 323, (Genko 3), another

shrine), Seisuiji en’gi (History of Seisui

of the same date held by the Jogu Temple in

Temple), and Wakan sansai zue (An illustrated

lharaki, and one dated I 324 (Genko 4) in a

encyclopedia).

private collection in Kyoto. The depictions of
Ezo in these four pieces done at the end of

80

HISTORIC PERIOD / T. SASAKI

The Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba, which
describes the illustrious family whose power is

represented by the Suwa Shrine in Shinano

ing. Information about the northern territories

Tadataka Suwa in 1356 (Embun 1) and

was collected by the ruling Japanese families

incorporates text written by eight people,

who responded to the revolt of the Ando, and

including Son'en Hoshinno. In its original

their familiarity with that part of the archi¬

format as an illustrated handscroll this work

pelago revealed information about the Ainu.

featured paintings done by four people,

that another rebellion in a remote northern

been lost and only the text survives today.

region was suppressed by Tamuramaro

Although the loss of the paintings removes

Sakanoue in about 801. Seisuiji en'gi includes

the Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba from direct consid¬

this legend in its recounting of the beginnings

eration as Ainus, the text provides good

of Seisui Temple in Kyoto, where Sakanoue

information on the Ainu of the Middle Ages

was buried. It was recorded in 1517 (Eisho

and has been studied from the literary point

14) that this document was given to the

of view,- landmark studies of this work have

painter, Mitsunobu Tosa (1434-1525). The

been done by Kindaichi (1925) and Kodama

work is now kept at the Tokyo National

(1971).

Museum. The Ezo depicted in this artwork

The Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba exists in many

have very strange appearances,- neither

manuscript forms. After collating nine different

specific characteristics of the Ainu nor

copies of this manuscript to reach an adequate

elements common for the Ezo discussed

interpretation of this work, I concluded that

above are apparent. In these pictures the Ezo,

each has transcription errors

depicted as fiendish enemies of Buddhism, are

due to misinterpretation or

being trod upon by a military figure rendered

misreading of ancient

as a godlike superior (fig. 9.2). Painters from

characters,- these errors, as

the Tosa school, lacking any knowledge about

well as the loss of the

the Ezo, used these fiendish figures to

original paintings, make it

represent them. Even these paintings can,

difficult to interpret these

however, provide valuable information about

documents. The Suwa

Japanese impressions of Ezo in the sixteenth

Daimyojin ekotoba remains

century, and a closer look provides insight

valuable as historical

into legends about Ezo revolts and their

material, however, because

suppression.

three regions of Ezo—
Hinomoto, Karako, and

in 1712 of the Wakan sansai zue, a pictorial
encyclopedia in 105 volumes by Ryoan

Ages. Descriptions in other

Terashima. Although I assert that the Ezo-shi

passages are reminiscent of

stands as the beginning of the Ainu-e tradi¬

more recent Ainu religious

tion (see below), the illustrations that were

ceremonies and of one of

published and circulated in Wakan sansai zue

the most important ritual

were pioneering Ainu-e, and its content

Other good materials

Illustrated Gazetteer of Ezo

In modern Japan, knowledge about the
Ainu began to increase with the publication

Watarito—in the Middle

artifacts, inaw.

9.3

There is good historical documentation

including Takamori Fujiwara, but these have

it describes the existence of

Among the first accurate ethnographic
renditions of Ainu clothing and mate¬
rial culture appeared in drawings
appended by an unknown artist to a
version of the Ezo-shi fuzu (Illustrated
gazetteer of Ezo). This image depicts
an Ainu man wearing an attush robe
with border designs. (TNM)

family played an important role in suppress¬

(now Nagano Prefecture), was completed by

(especially the accuracy of information about
Ainu language) is superior to that of the Ezo-

on the Ezo were created

shi. Scholars still question where Ryoan

during the half century

Terashima obtained his information about

between 1305 and 1356,

Ainu language and wonder why that same

more than at any other

accuracy was not reflected in his paintings,

time during this early

which in comparison to the written content

period, culminating with the release of the

of this work appear less convincing as factual

Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba. One factor in this

representations of Ainu. For instance,

productivity was increased Japanese knowledge

although there is a depiction of a man with

about the Ainu as a result of the mid-fifteenth-

long hair and a beard, he does not physically

century Tsugaru Ando Rebellion, which took

or by dress look like an Ainu. This man

place in present-day Aomori Prefecture and

wears patterned silk clothing obtained from

involved warfare between the Matsumae and

the Santan traders in the Amur area over

Esashi daimyo families and in which the Suwa

garments with tapered Ainu-style sleeves and

9/AINU-E HISTORICAL REVIEW

leggings made of Ainu bark cloth (attush), but

have been extremely unlikely that Ainu would

the depiction is unconvincing as a direct

have been physically present in Edo, the capitol

observational record of an Ainu wearing

city, where Hakuseki Arai worked. As Ezo-shi

Santan trade goods. It seems likely that Ryoan

copies continued to be made, more sketches

Terashima obtained written sources only, with

may have been added, but this is merely

the images coming from his imagination

conjecture because no artist has been identified

(Sasaki 1992).

as the illustrator of the Ezo-shi (fig. 9.3).

Ezo-shi and the Era of True Ainu-e

women, clothes, utensils, and implements

Ainu culture developed rapidly between the

present an excellent version of eariy-eigh-

eighteenth and earply nineteenth centuries.

teenth-century pictorial ethnography. Clothes

While the Ainu suffered at the hands of the

and materials are very well illustrated, which

The Ezo-shi sketches of Ainu men and

Japanese during this period, they continued to

suggests that actual ethnographic materials

produce many fine material objects and oral

were used as models. In the accuracy achieved

literature. Religious practices were developed,

in the illustrations, the Ezo-shi is far superior to

and such rituals as the bear-sending ceremony

the Wakan sansai zue. Even though Arai had

(iyomante) had become established by this time.

never visited Ezo, he made good use of the

Most artwork produced after the Ezo-sbi is

materials available in the Edo Shogunate

corroborated by written documents describing

library, and his book is full of valuable informa¬

Ainu culture at that time. However, not all

tion. Although some depictions of people are

Ainu-e illustrate Ainu culture faithfully,- there

problematic—physical attributes are distorted

may be more fallacious works than faithful

or are otherwise non-Ainu-like—the section

ones, and so it is necessary to examine each

titled "Elegant Ezo" appears to be a highly

carefully to derive an accurate rendition of

accurate rendition of an Ainu man wearing

Ainu culture during this period.

Santan clothes and Japanese swords. These

There is no need to introduce the Ezo-shi
of Hakuseki Arai to scholars. This book,

images are a convincing portrayal of contem¬
porary Ainu formal dress, which utilized many

which appeared in 1720 (Kyoho 5), is the

imported goods as luxury and prestige items,-

origin of modern Japanese studies of the Ainu

this can be verified in other sources. One

and had a great influence on its later develop¬

measure of the influence of this work is seen in

eighteenth-century style, but his production

ment. Surprisingly, although many copies of

the technique of rendering facial characteris¬

was limited and his work is poorly known.

the Ezo-shi exist, a complete revised edition has

tics, including hairstyle, beard, and eyebrows

This scene of an Ainu family hunting shows

never been published, despite its importance as

produced by straight lines, which set a stylistic

basic reference material. Although the Ezo-shi

precedent followed in most Ainu-e after 1720.

9.4

Hunting

Shunri Chishima (also known as Shunri
Matsumae) painted Ainu-e in a romantic late-

attention to detail but is more evocative than
ethnographic. (HMM)

indisputably marks the beginning of the
9.5

Problems with Ainu-e

This is a detail from a copy by Bunrei
Hayasaka of a scene from Curious

greatest epoch in the evolution of Ainu-e, it is

Ainu-e After Ezo-shi

problematic to call the Ezo-shi itself an Ainu-e

Several decades after the Ezo-shi first ap¬

because its pictures were based on actual

peared, Teiryo Kodama created a series of

Murakami. At that period it was cus¬

sketches of Ainu subjects,- these were ap¬

artworks that are considered to be the first

tomary for Japanese art students to

pended to it by an anonymous artist in Ezo-shi

authentic paintings (as opposed to the

copy original works by the masters, but

fuzu (Illustrated

Sights of Ezo Island by Shimanojo

most copies were not exact reproduc¬
tion. In this scene the student added a
Japanese screen behind the Japanese

gazetteer of Ezo). No
one is certain whether

guests, changing the ambience of the

illustrations were

original, which is shown in figure 6.3.

appended to the original

These content modifications are
troublesome as they often alter the
mood, information, or message of the

edition of Ezo-shi, but
even without illustra¬

original. Although the viewer must exer¬

tions it contains a wealth

cise caution in interpreting Ainu-e, they

of information. There

remain invaluable records of traditional
Ainu life. Without such recordings of the
lives of indigenous people as these by

may have been sketches
of a few easily trans¬

Japanese artists—or those created by

ported objects such as

American artist Paul Kane or the

swords or clothing in an

Irishman George Catlin of North Ameri¬
can Indians—much information about

early version of the Ezo-

these wonderful cultures would be lost

shi, but no images of

forever. (BMS Archives)

Ainu are shown: it would

82

HISTORIC PERIOD / T SASAKI

9.6

Tobu

Tobu, chief of the Monbetsu Ainu, was
one of the first subjects painted by
Hakyo Kakizaki in his Portraits of Ezo
Chieftains, 1783. This particular image
is known to have been painted by
Kakizaki, who was one of the most
prolific and talented Ainu-e painters
and a member of the Japanese family
(later named “Matsumae”) who
governed Hokkaido from the seven¬
teenth century. His series depicted
leaders of Ainu groups who traded
with the Matsumae, and so provides
insight into the society of high-status
Ainu ca. 1800. Kakizaki painted from
living models and was attentive to
features important to the Ainu like
curly hair (a sign of beauty), and
venerated artifacts, like the warrior’s
helmet crest seen here. (TNM)

previous scroll illustrations) to depict the

dates unknown) (fig. 9.4), Hakyo Kakizaki

Ainu. Although the dates of his birth and

(1764-1826), Gentan Tani (1778-1840),

death are unknown, Teiiyo Kodama was a

Shimanojo Murakami (1760-1808), Teisuke

painter active betv/een 1751 and 1764 in the

Murakami 1780-1846), Bunrei Hayasaka

Matsumae domain within the Ainu Hokkaido

(dates unknown) (fig. 9.5), and Byozan

homelands,- his painting techniques reflect

Hirasawa (1822-76). The University of

those used by the fifteenth-century school of

Oregon Museum in Eugene has a fine original

Masanobu Kano. The masterpiece Matsumae-

hanging scroll entitled Ainu jimbutsu-zu (date

Esashi Folding Screen is his best-known work, but

unknown), as well as Ezo People by Shunri

he also left numerous scroll paintings, all

Matsumae,- a good-quality manuscript of the

entitled Ezo Customs and Manners despite their

Record of Ezo Trip by Gentan Tani is held by the

having different content. In recent years

University of Pennsylvania Museum.

Satomi Igarashi has studied Teiryo Kodama's

In 1783 (Temmei 3), Hakyo Kakizaki

artworks and reported on his accomplish¬

painted one of the earliest of the few Ainu

ments (Igarashi 1991).

portraits that exist, and it is often considered

In the following generations certain

to be the finest Ainu-e. His subject was

Ainu-e deserve to be valued as paintings as

known only as "Tobu" and was identified as a

well as research information. Among the

leader of "Ezo chi monbetsu,” a reference to a

artists who are known for the quality of their

location that is difficult to identify today.

painting in addition to the accuracy of the

The painting of Tobu (fig. 9.6) is from Ishu

content regarding Ainu culture are Shunri

retsuzo (Portraits of Ezo [Ainu] Chieftains),-

Matsumae (also known as Shunri Chishima,

painted in extremely vivid colors, it is
verified as Kakizaki's genuine work and is
now in the collection of the Musee des
Beaux-Arts in Besangon, France. Although it
was made as a decorative painting and
contains some technical exaggerations, it
reveals Kakizaki's schooling in the Chinese
Nan-pin style, which emphasizes realism and
the use of Western perspective, as does the
similar Maruyama style in Japan. The
painting of Tobu is somewhat crude but has a
lifelike quality because it was sketched from
a living model,- Kakizaki used only a few
models for the people he illustrated in his
Ainu-e, and they are recognizable. In his hand

Tobu holds a decorative crest for a warrior's
helmet, a highly valued artifact that the Ainu
handed down from generation to generation.
This is a very accurate rendition of an Ainu
man, showing curly hair, which the Ainu
hold as a mark of personal beauty, and
detailed patterns on the attush clothing. This
illustration can be taken as a credible
depiction of actual Ainu people in the
Temmei period (1781-89).
Similar artworks appeared in the Bunka
and Bunsei periods (1804-30). Compared
with Kakizaki's painting some are poor-quality
reproductions, and, even worse, some are the
artists' own creations and lack ethnographic
truth: for example, the Kita Ezo zusetsu (Illustra¬
tions of northern Ezo) by Rinzo Mamiya in
1855 (Ansei 2), which was originally edited by
Teisuke Murakami using materials reprinted
from Rinzo Marakami's Douchu Yoroku of 1811.

9 /AINU-E HISTORICAL REVIEW

83

Hokui bunhai, a record of the Karafuto (Sakhalin)

and it expresses the most accurate understand¬

frontier exploration, is an excellent body of

ing of Ainu culture among Ainu-e materials of

work containing ethnography of the Karafuto

this period (fig. 9.7). For this reason, many

Ainu in narrative and illustrations. But when this

copies of this manuscript have been circulated,

work was published under the title Kita Ezo

and many are now found in the United States

zusetsu, the illustrations were done by

and Europe,- images derived from this work are

Gyokuransai Hashimoto and Tansai Ju, who

the main source of Ainu-e found in the United

reinterpreted the subject in the ukiyo-e style,

States. Among the materials in Europe, the

known as "pictures of the floating world" and

small booklets kept by the Folk Museum of

identified with woodblock prints featuring

Keel University, Germany, are excellent. In

geisha, beautiful courtesans, Kabuki actors, and

the United States, there are copies of Curious

other worldly or popular imaginary figures or

Sights of Ezo Island by Bunrei Hayasaka at the

scenes. In this rendering the Ainu materials are

University of Oregon,- a higher-quality

unfit for scholarly use, proof that painters who

specimen at the Brooklyn Museum of Art (fig.

were not aware of Ainu reality cannot be trusted

9.5),- and three scrolls with many fine illustra¬

as reliable ethnographic sources.
One should not consider Ainu-e to be

tions under this title by Shimanojo Murakami,
which were acquired in 1952 from the estate

simply paintings that depict queer manners

of Frederick Starr, at the Smithsonian's

and customs of a little-known people of a

National Museum of Natural History.

northern island: it is necessary to understand
the works' content in order to appreciate

Ezo-shima kikan was not the end of

Shimanojo's plans. He had intended to work
on a more ambitious Ainu book but passed
away in 1 808 before it was completed. His
adopted son, Teisuke Murakami, and Rinzo
Mamiya took over and completed Illustrations of
Ezo Life in 1855, which took as its thesis that

both Ainu and Japanese culture had the same
origin,- it is a laborious work that delves deeply
into Ainu culture. The content of its illustra¬
tions are of high value. The Berlin Folk
Museum has one page of this work, which was
collected by Heinrich von Siebold. Both
Rinzo Mamiya and Shimanojo Murakami lived
in the Ezo region and had close contact with
the Ainu, and they responsibly reported the
situation in the Ezo region to Edo,- they also
had excellent artistic skills with which to
depict Ainu life. Their works are very reliable,
but when others copied them mistakes and
erroneous interpretations of the originals
them properly. In reality, Ainu-e are useful as

occurred. Therefore, one must always exercise

materials to clarify the understanding of

caution in evaluating Ainu-e, because even

people who share a history on the Japanese

works by careful artists may be distorted when

extended period. His Curious Sights of

archipelago, as well as revealing the culture of

they are copied or reproduced.

Ezo Island, completed in 1799, offers

the Ainu. From this point of view, the series of

the most extensive description of Ainu

illustrations by Shimanojo Murakami are the

most recent of the Ainu-e artists, and it is not

most reliable source.

an exaggeration to call him the finest Ainu-e

9.7

CATCHiNG AN EAGLE

Shimanojo Murakami (1760-1808), a
shogunate official living in Ezo, had
great access to Ainu people over an

culture and society presented in the

Ainu-e format, and many copies are
found in collections outside of Japan.

Shimanojo Murakami (1760-1808),

Byozan Hirasawa (1822-76) was the

painter (fig. 9.8). His numerous works of

This image, which presents cultural

who is also called Hata no Awakimaro, had

diverse Ainu subjects have high value for

practices and Ainu objects in an envi¬

direct contact with the Ainu people and

research. There are more of his works overseas

experienced their culture as a shogunate

than in japan, and others are still being

official living in Ezo. Ezo-shima kikan (Curious

discovered. His pupils, Hako Kimura and

Sights of Ezo Island), completed in 1799

Sekkei Sawada, whose works are numbered

ronmental setting, is typical of
Murakami’s style. (HML)

(Kansei 12), contains his recollections and

among extant "Byozan-style" works, used his

observations. This book has great value today

rough copies as models and painted with a feel

as the most complete description of the Ainu,

similar to that of Byozan. The British Museum

HISTORIC PERIOD /T. SASAKI

has a scroll and a

through the northeastern region of mainland

rough sketch of Byozan's

Japan and Ezo and created a valuable illustrated

works, and the Scotland

ethnography. He returned to Ezo again in 1788

National Museum owns

and lived there for the next four years, writing

several excellent large-

about the Ainu lifeways and making paintings

scale works, including

of the Ainu.

Painting of Omusha and
Painting ofllimamu. In the

Ainu-e depict aspects of old Ainu culture
through the eyes of Japanese artists, thus

United States, the

making it possible to reconstruct otherwise

Peabody Essex Museum

unrecorded features of Ainu culture and, by

of Salem, Massachusetts,

comparing period illustrations with photo¬

owns important pieces

graphs and contemporary practices, to

like Painting of Ezo Playing

evaluate how it has been transformed

the Tonkori and Painting of

through time. The artworks of Teiryo

a Bear-sending Ceremony.

Kodania, Shimanojo Murakami, and Byozan

The University of

Hirasawa play important roles in this

Oregon Museum also

examination because these Japanese artists

owns his painting

had contact with Ainu people while they

entitled Ainu Hunters on a

either worked in Ezo or lived there over long

Hunting Trip to the

periods of time. Their firsthand experiences

Mountains in Autumn.

allowed them to understand at least some
aspects of Ainu culture, and even though

Modern Meaning

their depictions are sometimes exaggerated,

of Ainu-e

their works cannot be considered fabrica¬

Ainu-e have value as

tions. This is also true of the woodblock

materials for reconstruct¬

prints of Matsuura Takeshiro (1818-88),

ing the history and

which were published in 1869. Takeshiro was

content of early Ainu

a scholar hired by the Japanese government,-

culture. If the contents

he traveled all over Hokkaido and produced

depicted show manners

a number of well-written documentary works

and customs that have

about the contemporary social problems and

been handed down

living conditions of the Ainu in addition to

successively to later

wonderful drawings and woodblock prints.

generations, in different
periods, its authenticity
as ethnographic docu¬

a general lack of understanding about or

mentation is enhanced.

even prejudice against Ainu people, and so

For example, the Ainu

Ainu-e must be carefully evaluated for

used to hunt seals, and
9.8

Iyomante

Byozan Hirasawa (1822-76) was

This accuracy is important and makes
Takeshiro's work valuable: many Ainu-e reveal

information about this activity was passed

accuracy. In addition, recent legal issues
concerning portrait rights in Japan have

down in Ainu villages in the Volcano Bay area

made it more difficult to publish contempo¬

of southern Hokkaido, but today even elders

rary photographs of Ainu people, and so

the diversity of his work, which

do not remember the details. The picture

although Ainu-e are more readily available

covered many aspects of traditional

scrolls of Shimanojo Murakami and artworks of

than photographs, care must be taken to

Ainu life, and partly because of his

Masumi Sugae (1754-1829) contain illustra¬

select Ainu-e that illustrate faithfully the

tions of seal hunts that are depicted so

culture they represent so that misunderstand¬

example of his work, much of which

precisely that they help restore knowledge

ing and prejudice are not spread

is in museums outside of Japan.

about this forgotten aspect of Ainu culture.

(HML)

Masumi Sugae was a travel writer from Mikawa

Translated by Ritsuko Howson with assistance from

(now Aichi Prefecture) who in 1783 traveled

Chang-su Houchins,- edited by William Fitzhugh.

one of the most recent and best of

Ainu-e artists, partly because of

prolific output. His Painting of a

Bear-sending Ceremony is a good

9 / AINU-E HISTORICAL REVIEW

85

T

he Ainu people, particularly those

10 Trading
Brokers and
Partners with
China, Russia,
and Japan
Shiro Sasaki

tribal chief to administer the region. By these

history of close contact and

actions the local hierarchy and tribal relation¬

exchange with the people in the

ships were significantly altered, and trade

lower Amur River basin and the Primorskii

became increasingly formal and regulated.

region on the Asian coast (figs. 10.1, 10.2).
Although the beginning of such contact is

The Amur River basin, which was ruled
by the Yuan dynasty until the middle of the

uncertain, it goes back to prehistoric times:

fourteenth century and then by the Ming

archaeological evidence indicates that the

dynasty (1368-1644) into the fifteenth

inhabitants of Hokkaido and Sakhalin had

century, becomes less prominent in historical

contacts with the inhabitants of the continent

literature after 1435. However, trading

at least since the late Paleolithic era. Archae¬

activities probably continued, and the main

ology can provide material evidence of these

product, fur, continued to be supplied by the

contacts, but it leaves unanswered such

people in the Amur and Sakhalin. Later,

questions as what the exchange brought

beginning in 1616, the Qing dynasty revital¬

besides goods and how it proceeded.
When Mongol forces established control

10.1

the Yuan dynasty, which appointed a local

who lived in Sakhalin, have a

ized this trade to an unprecedented degree,
extending its power downstream on the Amur

of the Amur River and began military expedi¬

River each time they won a minor regional

tions to Sakhalin, exchange between the

dispute with Russia, the first being in 1652. In

ancestors of the Ainu and residents of the

1689 the dynasty officially took control of

continent increased dramatically. According to

the Amur River basin with the Nerchinsk

Ainu Maritime Traders

By the fifteenth century Ainu mariners
had become influential traders linking
Japan, Korea, China, Russia, and
Kamchatka. Chinese silk, bronze, and
glass beads moved south into Hok¬
kaido and Japan, and Japanese iron,
rice, and sake flowed north into Hok¬
kaido, the Kuriles, and Kamchatka.
Meanwhile, the latter supplied reindeer,
eagle feathers, and marine-mammal
products to the Japanese, and seaotter pelts to the Russians.

10.2

Amur Santan Trade

After 1689 Chinese trade goods—
especially Nishiki silk brocade, glass
beads, and metal ornaments—reached
the Ainu by routes operated by Santan
(Ul’chi) and Nivkhi peoples of the lower
Amur River. Nivkhi traders supplied the
western coast of the Sea of Okhotsk

10.2

and northern Sakhalin. Santan
dominated the Sakhalin trade and
supplied the Ainu, who also conducted
direct trade with the Amur.

the official historical records of the Yuan

Treaty. The following year they sent forces to

dynasty (1271-1368), the Mongol expeditions

the estuary and demanded that the residents,

to Sakhalin were initiated to resolve a conflict

including the Sakhalin Ainu, pay tribute. The

between the Kugi and the Gilemi who

dynasty continued its island campaign by

inhabited the area from the Amur River delta

sending mandarins and soldiers, and they

This mid-eighteenth-century painting by

to Sakhalin. The success of the Mongolian

eventually succeeded in seizing all but the

Teiryo Kodama shows the impact of

expedition forced the Kugi into a tributary

southern tip of Sakhalin.

Japanese and Santan trade on Ainu

relationship with the Yuan dynasty, which had

10.3

Cultural Impact of Trade

clothing and the material culture of Ezo.

The Qing dynasty ruled these regions

considerable impact on the economic and

by imposing upon them a fur tribute system,

silk robe obtained from Santan traders,

social structure of Sakhalin and the Amur River

just as had the Yuan and Ming dynasties.

but his sword, which is Japanese, is

basin. Instead of wiping out the population or

Residents who were required to pay tributes

The man wears a foreign-style hat and a

carried Ainu-fashion across the back.
The woman wears an Ainu robe, but her
hoop earrings with silk tassels, her

forcing them out of the territory, the Yuan

had to register according to their hala (the

dynasty demanded tribute in fur. Because

clan of the father's side) and gashan (village),

necklace and medallion, and her basket

tribute from one side was always accompanied

and a designated chief of each unit was put in

were obtained through trade. (AMS,

by rewards from the other, a traffic in goods

charge of district security as well as the

Kodama Collection)

became established under the supervision of

annual collection and delivery of fur. By 1750,

86

HISTORIC PERIOD/ S SASAKI

Dynasties of China and Manchuria
Mainland China

Manchuria

Northern Song

960-1127

Liao

916-1125

Southern Song

1 127-1279

Jin

1115-1234

Yuan

1280-1368

Mongol (Yuan)

1234-1368

Ming

1368-1644

Qing

1644-1912

Qing

1616-1912

fifty-six hala and 2,398 households were
registered as fur tribute payers,- those who paid
with fur were rewarded mainly with Nishiki silk
brocade, and every year the dynasty supplied
the chief of each clan and village with official
silk clothes (mangpao, duanpao), which were the
gowns of the mandarin (fig. 10.3). Those who
offered especially large fur tributes were
granted the right to create a familial relation¬
ship with officials of the Manchu eight-banner
organization (at the time equivalent to Chinese
aristocrats) by marrying an official's adopted
daughter. Further, the tribute payers were
allowed to engage in trade with officials and
merchants at the tribute location. By these
policies, the Qing dynasty brought political
stability to the region and established the basis
for commerce and economic development.
The Qing dynasty initially established
an office in Ningguta, which is situated
midway along the Mudan River, to handle fur
from the lower Amur and Sakhalin. The payer
of the tribute was obliged to bring the fur to
regional offices, except for remote areas like
the lower part of the Amur and Sakhalin,
where officials were dispatched every year to
collect tribute and present rewards. During
the regime of the emperor Qianlong (173695), such a post existed at Kiji Lake, which
was a major crossroads for the trade from
Amur to Sakhalin, and after 1798 at Delen,
upstream of Kiji Lake. Delen is known from
Rinzo Mamiya's Amur exploration in 1809
and 1810. The local office was used for the
ritual of the fur tribute, as a trading place, and
a market, which attracted many people from
various regions of Amur and Sakhalin,
operated every summer. Rinzo Mamiya
reported that when he was there, 500 to 600
people were present at the market and trade
was very active.
Initially the Sakhalin Ainu were active
participants in the growing trade activity,
which was supported by the Qing dynasty's
rule over Amur and Sakhalin. In 1732 six hala,
eighteen gashan, and 148 households were
registered as giving fur tribute in Sakhalin,- of
the hala, three were ancestors of the Sakhalin
10.3

10/TRAD INC

BROKERS AND PARTNERS

Ainu. Because Ainu society did not have

parallel manner to the Santan, as trading

higher-level political organizations, like the

middlemen in the southern Sakhalin and

hala, Ainu chiefs from the villages at Taraika

Hokkaido sector. While the Santan enjoyed

and Kotankeshi on the east coast and Nayoro

strong backing from the Qing dynasty, rival

on the west coast were appointed to manage

Ainu traders could not yet get Japanese

the trade. Chiefs often accompanied their

financial or military support even after they

villagers when they traveled to the local office

gained independence from Qing dynasty rule.

of the Qing government to make payments in

Tokunai Mogami of the Tokugawa Sho¬

fur as well as to trade with Manchurian officials

gunate, who was assigned to survey the

and others from neighboring areas. By the

Sakhalin trade, understood this point and

1780s the Tokugawa Shogunate, threatened by

recommended direct rule of Sakhalin and Ezo

Russia's growing power in the region, began to

by the government to stabilize the area.

assert its political and economic influence in

aware that they could not depend on the

lives of the Ainu in southern Sakhalin increased

Matsumae clan to effectively govern Ezo, and

sharply around this time, and by the beginning

so in 1807 they took control of western Ezo

of the nineteenth century, the Japanese eco¬

and Sakhalin as they had eastern Ezo and the

nomic zone on Sakhalin extended as far north

Kurile Islands in 1799. Further, the Tokugawa

as Taraika, midway up the east coast. With this

government realized that the mounting debts

political change most Ainu ceased to offer

owed by the Ainu to the Santan might

tribute to the Qing dynasty,- only the Nayoro

discourage indemnities or seizure of lands and

Ainu, whose position on the west coast put

resources. They were also concerned that

them in close proximity to China, continued

they might lose Ainu assistance and loyalty

paying tribute, although sporadically.

because of their impoverished condition and

The Matsumae clan, although it was in
charge of Sakhalin, did little to protect and

decided to pay Ainu debts to the Santan.
Government funds were used to procure otter

govern the Ainu there. Instead, the clan

pelts from the Sakhalin and the Hokkaido

demanded that the Ainu surrender the

Ainu, and the debts were paid off in a series of

Chinese-made silk (the so-called Ezonishiki)

meetings between 1809 and 1812. The person

they had obtained through trade, which was

who represented the government in this effort

then resold for a high price in Honshu, where

was Denjuro Matsuda, a former member of

it was identified as the Matsumae's special

Rinzo Mamiya's Sakhalin exploration team.

product. To procure the silk, the Ainu fell into

Matsuda not only solved the Ainu debt

debt, owing much fur to the Santan, a group

problem but also regulated the commercial

indigenous to Kiji Lake where the local office

activities of the Santan in Sakhalin. He

of the Qing dynasty was located, who came

permitted only those people licensed by the

from the continent to Sakhalin to trade.

shogunate to trade with the Santan and

Today the descendants of the Santan are said

prohibited ordinary Ainu from trading. The

to be members of the Lll'chi people. The

trading place was also subject to regulation,

Santan, who paid a tribute in fur to Manchu¬

and the only site allowed was Shiranushi, on

rian officials every year, used silk to exchange

the southern edge of the island. To supervise

for fur because they had learned that silk,

the commercial activities the Tokugawa

traded through the Sakhalin Ainu, was priced

Shogunate built a lookout station at Tonnai,

high in Japan.

situated about halfway between Shiranushi

During the last half of the eighteenth

88

In time, the Tokugawa regime became

managing Ezo. The influence of Japan on the

and Nayoro, where the arrival of Santan boats

century increasing demand for the Ezonishiki

could be monitored. When an arrival of a

silk in Japan gave the Santan dominance in

boat was reported, officials were dispatched

political and economic affairs over the Ainu,

to inspect it, put seals on all the merchandise,

who had previously been trading entrepre¬

and then let the ship go on to Shiranushi

neurs between China and Japan. At that time,

where all Santan goods were placed in storage.

the Qing dynasty had a strong hand in

The leaders of Shiranushi and Nayoro were

governing the Amur and Sakhalin region and

called, and the seals were cut in front of the

reacted quickly to any infringement of their

government officials,- only then could trade

tribute and trade benefits. By contrast, the

with the merchants begin. Although Denjuro

Japanese government did not yet have such

Matsuda used Sakhalin sable as the rate of

power, and the Ainu operated in a somewhat

exchange, actual trade was conducted using

HISTORIC PERIOD/ S. SASAKI

10.4

Wealthy Sakhalin Ainu

Contacts between the Asian mainland

sable, fox, otter, and badger, as well as such

ued to go to Shiranushi for trade until 1868,

iron products as pots and tools.

when the new Meiji government of Japan

and Hokkaido, Japan, and the Kuriles
were controlled primarily by Sakhalin

During the first half of the nineteenth

ceased official trade with them. Throughout

Ainu. This wealthy man, photographed

century, the Tokugawa Shogunate's influence

this period the number of the Santan boats

by Bronislaw Pilsudski about 1905,

had not reached north of Nayoro on the west

arriving at Shiranushi ranged from one to

wears a different style of clothing than

coast (on the east coast, the area to Taraika

more than ten annually and averaged five to

Bay was already under their control), so the

six boats per year.

that identified with the Hokkaido Ainu.
Sakhalin Ainu spoke a separate dialect,

Although the Ainu were relieved of their

and their culture was quite different

Santan could conduct their business freely in

from Ainu culture in Hokkaido and the

these areas. Later, however, when they traded

debt to the Santan thanks to Denjuro

on Sakhalin, they chose to go to Shiranushi

Matsuda's scheme, they also lost their leading

and thus were willing to put themselves under

role in trading activities in Sakhalin, for

Kuriles. (NAA 47368)

the government's control,- obviously, doing

Matsuda's rules also prohibited the use of

business directly with shogunate officials was

advanced loans and restricted Santan business

attractive, the main benefit being that the

to Shiranushi. Although the shogunate and

Japanese paid high prices for fur. The trading

the Matsumae clan confined trade to the

rules that Denjuro Matsuda set were main¬

limited region facing the Soya Straits, because

tained even after 1822, when Sakhalin was

they preferred conducting business directly

returned to the Matsumae clan, and after

with the Japanese, Santan merchants' exclu¬

I 853, when it again came under the

sive trade with the Ainu disintegrated. The

government's direct rule. The Santan contin¬

dependency of the Ainu on Japan in terms of
trade and cultural exchanges and the regula¬
tion of Ainu fishing under Matsumae rule also
diminished the Ainu potential and enthusiam
for continental trade by the middle of the
nineteenth century.
At the end of the nineteenth century,
the Santan who had seized political and
economic leadership in Sakhalin lost that
power after ceding to the Chinese and
Russian merchants. However, trading
relationships between the Sakhalin Ainu and
the Santan continued: it was told in Ainu
legends and in Lll'chi stories. Some of the
Ul'chi are told they are of Ainu origin,
specifically, the Kuisali and Duwan clans,
whose ancestors immigrated from Sakhalin.
Other groups on the continent also have
Ainu blood, resulting from men who went to
Sakhalin and returned home with an Ainu
wife. After 1945 the relationship between
the continental populations and the Sakhalin
Ainu was cut completely when the Sakhalin
Ainu were forced to relocate to Hokkaido
when the Japanese lost control of this area to
the Russians at the end of World War II.
In conclusion, historical sources reveal
a long history of Ainu involvement with
continental trade, as middlemen between the
earlier Chinese trade operated through
Santan voyagers and later with Russians as
the latter began to take over an increasing
share of political and economic control in
the late nineteenth century (fig. 10.4). Ainu,
who had been masters of their coastal
environment and had developed successful
maritime adaptations, seized upon the new

10/ TRADING

BROKERS AND

PARTNERS

89

10.6 Young Girl
Wearing Necklace

Most early visitors
photographed Ainu men
and women in formal
poses wearing ceremonial
costumes. In this photo¬
graph by G. Noguchi, who
was a member of Charles
Appleton Longfellow’s
entourage of 1871, a
young girl who has the first
phase of a lip tattoo shows
off her necklace and
medallion. (NPS/LNHS)

10.7 Necklace with
Figure Medallion

Strips of red silk tied to
earrings and necklaces
added accent, beauty,
and spiritual value to
ornaments such as this
necklace, which has an
old brass medallion.
Although the earliest
beads and medals came
from Chinese sources,
they were also later
supplied by Japanese
traders and by the
Matsumae, who mis¬
represented beads they
had produced and sold
them to the Ainu as
imported goods. (NMNH
150706)

10.5 Necklace

opportunties to facilitate trade between China

coastal fisheries) to Japanese fish barons

with Flowered Medallion

and the developing Japanese nation (figs.

sponsored by the Matsumae enclave and

10.5-10.7). During the medieval and early

partly as a result of the related loss of coastal

Beaded necklaces with medallions
were worn by women for ceremonial
occasions. Flowered rosettes, originally
a Taoist motif, were made of brass.
The earliest beads and medallions to
reach the Ainu were of Russian and
Chinese manufacture. Blue, white,
black, and banded beads were the
most popular. Women treasured their
necklaces and handed them down for
generations. (BMS C18766)

modern periods, Ainu culture flourished in its

territories. Decimated by introduced diseases,

new capacity as an economic broker,- but by

without a viable economy, and increasingly

the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries

persecuted by Japanese overlords, the Ainu

the Ainu lost their competitive edge to the

were forced to retreat from their former

expanding maritime skills and financial

coastal demographic strongholds into the

capabilities of Japanese and Chinese-supported

interior of Hokkaido, where they took up a

Santan traders, who provided silk, iron, and

different economy. Some Ainu remained

other commodities to a increasingly fashion¬

living permanently on the coast to pursue

conscious and consumer-oriented Japanese

their former maritime traditions and the

society. Eventually, the Ainu were completely

economic contacts that had, for several

dispossessed of their involvement in the

centuries, given them a prominent role as

maritime trade, partly as a result of the loss of

independent maritime traders of the Seas of

maritime subsistence resources (salmon and

Okhotsk and Japan.

10/ TRADING

BROKERS AND PARTNERS

91

A
Tourism,
Assimilation,
and Ainu
Survival Today
K.AZUYOSHI OHTSUKA

lthough the Ainu people and

people were assigned to the Ainu without

their lands were severely ex¬

acknowledging their existence as a native

ploited during the shogunate

people,- and an aggressive assimilation policy

period (before 1868), much of

was established that imposed Japanese culture

Ainu culture, including language, handicrafts,

and educational systems on the Ainu. By

and religious and ceremonial beliefs, survived

designating Hokkaido for the first time as a

intact into modern times because the sho¬

land "without owner," Japan sanctioned a

gunate and its local Ezo (Hokkaido) gover¬

massive resettlement of Japanese to take

nors, the Matsumae clan, did not allow

possession of lands previously occupied only

Japanese immigration into what the Ainu

by Ainu. Armed with advanced technologies

knew as Ainu mosir (the land of humans). This

and capital, these new settlers brought an

regulation was not meant to protect the Ainu,-

exploitative and industrial ethic into a land

rather, it was enforced to prevent other

that for generations had been managed

Japanese from competing with the profitable

according to the traditional worldview of the

Matsumae monopoly of Ezo products. In

Ainu people. Within thirty years, the forced

addition to enriching the Matsumae clan, this

assimilation and policies fostering Ainu

policy also produced large profits for the

naturalization into the imperial Japanese nation

merchants who operated the Kitamae

had destroyed the symbiotic ecological

shipping trade bringing such Ezo products as

balance that had existed between the Ainu and

salmon, dried herring, fish fertilizer, abalone,

their traditional natural resources and lands.

sea-mammal products, timber, and other

materials into Japan.
When the modern
nation of Japan was
established during the
Meiji Restoration,
various actions were
taken that dealt an
even harsher blow to
the Ainu: by official
decree, the name of the
land was changed from
its traditional Ainu
term "Ezo" to "Hok¬
kaido",- civil duties like
those given to Japanese

As Hokkaido became more integrated
into the everyday life of the Japanese as a
source of important industrial and food
resources, it assumed a new role in the minds
of Japan's southern citizens as the nation's
wild and exotic northern province. At first
this image was based on the perception of
"wilderness" and "nature," but soon the Ainu
began to play an indispensable role in the
"scenery" of Hokkaido (fig. 111). Large
numbers of illustrations and postcards illustrat¬
ing Ainu manners and customs were sold, and
woodblock prints and photographs began to
appear as the first stage in the commercialized
promotion of Ainu culture. Typically, when
members of the imperial family and other high
officials visited Hokkaido on inspection trips,

11.1, 11.2

their schedules included visits to Ainu areas,

Bear Carving

The most stereotypical image of early

and these regions gradually began to be seen as

Ainu tourist art is the carved wooden

tourist attractions.

bear. There are different theories as to

After the Russo-Japanese war in

whether bear carving was introduced to

1904-05 —when Japan solidified its

the Ainu by Japanese tourists returning
with examples from Switzerland or

national boundaries to include Hok¬

whether it was developed by the Ainu

kaido—the Hokkaido tourist industry

themselves. Once the concept caught

began to develop rapidly. Railroad compa¬

on, tourist sales became a steady

nies from Osaka and Nagoya sent groups of

income for the best Ainu carvers. This
specimen, produced in the 1920s,

tourists to Hokkaido to view the "primitive"

shows a relatively early style; the form

manners and customs of various Ainu groups in

was later refined. This photograph of a

their natural "wild and untamed" setting, which

carver’s workshop was shot by Sister

were as exotic and fascinating to southern

Inez Hilger. (NAA T-8; K. Ohtsuka)

Japanese as western North America and its
native peoples were to Easterners and Europeans
in the late nineteenth century. Some of the
earliest albums of souvenir photographs of the
Ainu date to this period.

92

HISTORIC PERIOD/ K

OHTSUKA

Souvenirs and Ainu Tourism
To most people the concept of Ainu tourism

newspapers as industrial deforestation

is linked closely to the wooden carvings of

displaced bears from their former forest

bears and other items (figs. 11.2-1 1.4) that
11.3 a, b, c

Towel-Hanger

This towel rack and its carrying case
are some of the earliest Ainu items

began to appear more frequently in the

habitat,- in one tragic incident an entire

travelers purchase when visiting Hokkaido and the

family of farmers was killed, adding terror

Ainu. These carved and painted figurines that

and mystique to the primeval image of the

known to be made for sale to

capture the movements and habits of bears have

untamed northern territory. The establish¬

Japanese. While most Japanese

become a trademark of the Ainu, illustrating their

ment of nationwide transportation systems

towel racks are made to hang on a

economic and cultural relationship with Japan in

including roads, rail lines, and ferries

the modern context.

between Honshu and Hokkaido made it

wall, this one stands on a base of
walnut arches carved with intricate
Ainu designs. The chain links are

Surprisingly, the making of carved wooden

possible for southerners to visit Hokkaido

also of Ainu manufacture. The

bears as tourist souvenirs actually originated

in large numbers for recreation as well as

Japanese cedar storage box is

outside the Ainu sphere in Europe. In 1922

for business, thus producing a boom in the

fastened with bamboo nails and was

Yoshichika Tokugawa, who was a descendent of

Hokkaido tourist industry. People who

penter in Honshu. The buyer has

the Tokugawa family in Obihiro and ran a large

went to Hokkaido often returned with bear

written an inscription on the front,

farm in Yakumo on the Oshima Peninsula,

carvings as souvenirs to illustrate tales of

traveled to Europe and discovered Swiss farmers

their travels.

probably made by a Japanese car¬

which reads “Towel-hanger made in
Ezo," and on the back is written
“Bunsei 12 [1829] purchased on a
winter day.” (K. Ohtsuka Collection)

making bear carvings for sale to tourists as a

These tourists rarely realized the

means of supplementing the meager earnings

religious significance of bears to the Ainu or

from their crops. He brought some samples

how serious an issue it was for the Ainu to

home to Japan and encouraged Ainu farmers to

carve wooden bears for profit. Bears are

begin carving bears during the winter. The idea

called kimun-kamuy (god of the mountain) by

took root, with the bear seen as an appropriate

the Ainu and were among their most sacred

way to represent Hokkaido's abundant nature,

animals, and the carving of images of bears

and the production of bears as tourist

and other animals considered to be spirits was

souvenirs became part of the Ainu
seasonal calendar.
The exhibition of
Ainu manners and

previously restricted to religious implements,
especially to a man's prayer stick (ikupasuy).
The creation of animal images in paintings
or carvings, especially the image of bears, was

customs in expositions

never taken lightly, and it certainly was not

designed to promote

done for commercial purposes. Hokkaido

industry, which were
held beginning in the Meiji
period in such cities as Tokyo

Ainu did not even have a word for "bear" but
rather referred to this species as "god" or
"figure of a human being." In addition to bears,

and Osaka, made the public

the tourist industry soon began to produce

more aware of the relationship

dolls wearing traditional Ainu clothing, these

between Ainu and bears. At the

were initially made by Japanese, but the

same time, news of bear attacks

practice was later taken up by Ainu craftsmen.

II / TOURISM AND ASSIMILATION

93

An Ainu Boom
In 1950 the Marimo festival, named after an
unusual aquatic "duckweed" that grows as a
free-floating ball in Akan Lake, Hokkaido,
was held for the first time at Akan and has
been held there every year since. The
festival has become a tourist event adver¬
tised with the composite Japanese and Ainu
title "koi [love] Marimo." Another event that
helped promote "the exotic Ainu" as a
tourist attraction was the literary work
Whistle of Kotan written by Nobuo Ishimori
in 1957 and later made into a popular film.
Japanese society, which was then in the
midst of a postwar revival, discovered
something fresh and new in this story of an
Ainu brother and sister, and its popularity
was a boon to Hokkaido tourism
In the 1960s the Ainu tourist industry
collaborated with Japanese travel agencies to
develop a new tour route that featured Ainu
destinations. Travel by Japanese to Hokkaido
entered a boom phase, and for the first time
many young people backpacked and trekked
around Hokkaido during the summer.
Noboribetsu Hot Spring opened an area
featuring the Ainu called "Bear Meadow" in
about 1959, and the Ainu became substan¬
tially involved in tourism. Shiraoi, which had
long been known as an Ainu settlement,
became a tourist destination, and in 1965 an
Ainu heritage village, Shiraoi Poroto Kotan,
consisting of traditional houses and souvenir
stands, was established. In 1966, Village of
Yukar opened with reconstructions of a
traditional Ainu house and recitations from
11.4 Japanese Clogs

As with the towel-hanger (fig. 11.3), an

The steady commercialization of the

the mythic oral tradition (yukar). In this way,

Ainu that began with bear carvings later

songs about the Ainu, including the popular

produced permanent tourist areas called "Ainu

songs "Iyomante no yuro" (The Night of the

and their straps with Ainu designs.

kotan." At such centers as Shiraoi and Akan,

Bear Festival) by Hisao Ito and "Pirika menoko"

(Shin Mouri Collection)

traditional Ainu songs and dances are performed

(Beautiful Girl), became known across

daily. By touring exhibitions of traditional Ainu

generational boundaries.

Ainu woodcarver was commissioned to
decorate these Japanese clogs (geta)

11.5

“Museum Ainu”

Ainu began modeling costumes, creat¬
ing artifacts, and performing dances

clothing and viewing demonstrations of Ainu
beliefs customs, tourists developed a version of

As commercialization of the Ainu image
progressed, the Ainu kotan became an indis¬

for Japanese tourists who flocked to

the daily life of traditional Ainu which then

pensable part of the Hokkaido tourism

Hokkaido to visit Japan's “Wild North"

entered public consciousness, even though few,

enterprise: performances staged to replicate

after railroad construction began in
1880. Today, Ainu centers and muse¬
ums like the Ainu Museum at Shiraoi

if any, Ainu have actually lived their lives in this

expressions of traditional culture in the Ainu

manner in recent times. Despite government

kotan became important attractions to promote

continue to present Ainu culture to the

policies that encouraged touristic enterprise

the sale of goods. Wood carvings of bears and

public and have initiated programs to

among the Ainu and helped preserve some

other animals, goods made from traditional

aspects of traditional Ainu culture within a

Ainu elm-bark fabric (attush), and other articles

commercial milieu, other aspects of Ainu life,

seen in staged Ainu performances were sold to

preserve Ainu culture.

94

including the use of tattoos, earrings, and the

the tourists. Although the sale of souvenirs

Ainu language itself, were suppressed or

contributed to the economy of those Ainu

officially banned

people associated with the tourism industry,

HISTORIC PERIOD / K.

OHTSUKA

souvenirs, reconstructed kotan, and perfor¬

for Cultural Affairs (Bunkacho) designated Ainu

mances of Ainu dance, song, and ceremonies

traditional dances, including those performed

strengthened the view held by many Japanese

in tourist areas, as "important intangible cultural

and foreign visitors to Hokkaido that even

property." This action helped the Ainu

modern Ainu people continued to live in a

recognize the value of the traditional culture

traditional—i.e., "primitive"—fashion.

that had been passed down from their ances¬
tors for generations, and this pride in Ainu

Tourism and Ethnic Identity

11.6 “Ainus Ride
Usually Without Saddle”
Not only natural resources were

heritage helped stimulate the cultural revival

Today, with worldwide interest in the survival

now underway. The new policies also helped

of aboriginal cultures, the transmission of

reorient museum presentations, such as those in

traditional Ainu culture through tourism and

Shiraoi and Akan, toward a more modern and

heritage museums has become an effective

accurate perspective that found broader

means for arousing interest in ethnic identity.

support among Ainu people.

The tourist center has become more than a

The established view about the Ainu

place to demonstrate traditional culture: for

naturalization policy enacted by the Japanese

harnessed when Japan began to

the Ainu it provides a context in which to

government is that it caused their traditional

develop Hokkaido—the Ainu, once

reassert one's cultural and ethnic identity and

culture to disappear,- the purpose of this

to pass on this knowledge to other Ainu and

policy, as decreed in the Hokkaido Former

to visitors (fig. 1 1.5).

Aborigines Protection Act of 1899, was to

considered fearsome and enigmatic,
had become a “domesticated’’ tourist
attraction; a similar conception arose
about Indians in America’s “Wild
West.” The question raised by this

Recently the public has begun to gain a

replace traditional Ainu culture with Japanese

broader appreciation of traditional culture

culture. Although these policies certainly

through education and political actions by

had a devastating impact, I maintain that the

Japanese photographer (because no

native peoples elsewhere in the world. This

rise of tourism and the commercialization of

such riding style was practiced) or

exposure has allowed visitors to better under¬

various aspects of Ainu life have ultimately

whether the photographer staged the

stand—and express complaints and concerns

helped protect them from an even worse

about—the more commercial and fabricated

erosion of their identity.

postcard image is whether the Ainu
was playing a joke on a naive

scene. Sets of photographs featuring
Ainu, bears, and landscapes were
marketed as tourist souvenirs from

aspects of the Ainu tourism industry. As the

Japan’s “Wild North.” (NAA 98-10404)

dichotomy grows between the economic

As noted, many aspects of Ainu culture,
including ceremonies, songs and dances, and

motives driving Ainu

handicraft techniques that have been passed

tourism and the need

down among the Ainu, were continued and

to reevaluate the role

passed on as part of the activities of museums

of Ainu culture within

and tourist areas. A few elders insisted that

Japanese society,

even those rituals staged as demonstrations

concerns about the

at tourist areas were legitimate traditional

image of the Ainu that

ceremonies. Their support has allowed Ainu

is presented to the

culture to continue even though it was rarely

public are likely to

maintained by individual families.

increase.
In the 1980s the

Japanese people sometimes disparag¬
ingly call the Ainu who work in tourist areas

Ainu were influenced

"tour Ainu," and many Ainu agree that work in

by the growing

tourist areas is not ideal employment. One

international campaign

must consider, however, that the energy they

for native rights,- they

bring to this activity has helped them preserve

began to question their

their heritage and even acquire a new sense of

lives as a "folk" people

Ainu identity within a human-rights frame¬

and to criticize the idea

work. When I see them working with such

that their culture

devotion and ethnic pride, I am impressed by

should be used as an

the strength of an ethnic tradition that has

educational or

resisted destruction even under the harshest

promotional instru¬

forces of assimilation and repression. It is not

ment of the tourism

inaccurate to say that much of the extant Ainu

business. At the same

culture consists of those traditions that have

time, Japanese policy

been maintained and passed down over the

toward Ainu culture

past hundred years within the context of

was changing,- for

touristic enterprise, most recently within Ainu

example, the Agency

museums and tourist centers.

II /TOURISM AND ASSIMILATION

95

N

o Japanese Columbus ever

The Ainu
and the Early
Modern
Japanese State,

1600-1868
David L. Howell

Hokkaido, controlled the rest of the country.

"discovered" Hokkaido, nor did

Unique among early modern domains,

Ainu culture ever exist free of

Matsumae held no land in fief from the

influence from the south. The

Tokugawa Shogunate but rather gained its

peoples of Hokkaido and Honshu traded,

legitimacy by acting as intermediary in trade

fought, and occasionally lived together for

and other contact with the Ainu. This role

centuries before the Tokugawa shoguns

derived from the shogunate's seclusion

established indirect control over the Ainu

policies, which severely restricted the ability

homeland at the beginning of the seventeenth

of Japanese to travel beyond the core polity.

century. The onset of the early modern era

In general, Matsumae functioned as the

marked the beginning of a new relationship

Japanese state vis-a-vis the Ainu, although for

between the Ainu and the Japanese state—new

a time in the nineteenth century (1799-1821

not for the fact of contact but for its scale and

and 1855-68) the shogunate assumed direct

political and diplomatic significance.

control over parts of Hokkaido in response to

The "Japanese state" in this essay actually
refers to two distinct entities whose attitudes

a perceived threat from Russia.
The Tokugawa regime was the first in

toward the Ainu often diverged. The Tokugawa

Japanese history to demarcate clear bound¬

Shogunate exercised central political authority

aries for itself. These boundaries were not the

but administered only about a quarter of Japan's

lines on a map that separate modern nation¬

territory directly,- some 270 autonomous daimyo

states,- rather, the core polity was surrounded

domains, including Matsumae in southern

by buffers of ambivalent sovereignty, nomi¬
nally autonomous but in fact subordinate to
the state. Japan's northern border was the
Oshima Peninsula in southern Hokkaido,
which separated Japan proper from the realm
of the Ainu. The territory on the Ainu side
was called Ezochi, "land of the eastern
barbarians." Its borders (aside from the one
with Japan) were not well defined until the
mid-nineteenth century, although in practice
Ezochi was usually identified with Hokkaido,
the Kuriles, and southern Sakhalin—all areas
inhabited by Ainu but not by significant
numbers of other indigenous peoples.
The border separating Ezochi from the
core polity ostensibly served to exclude the
Ainu from the Japanese state, but in fact it
drew them decisively into the early modern
Japanese world order. The act of drawing a
political boundary upon Hokkaido of necessity
left some people on the "Japanese" side of the
border and others on the "Ainu” side. Had the
boundary been perceived as a natural one—if a
strong sense of the Japanese and Ainu as
essentially different people already existed—the
demarcation of a political boundary might
have signified nothing more than a confirma¬
tion of the status quo, but such was not the
case. The Japanese at the time were conscious
of differences between themselves and the
Ainu, but when they sought to make sense of
Ainu identity they did not think in terms of
seemingly immutable characteristics like race
or even culture. Instead, they employed a
much more fluid conception of difference,
Juzoku (T. Kikuchi 1988,- Howell 1994).

12.1

96

HISTORIC PERIOD / D

HOWELL

"assimilated" into Japanese society.
The shogunate's recognition of
Matsumae as its proxy in southern Hokkaido
transformed a relatively equal balance of
economic and military power into one
heavily favoring the Japanese. After the
demarcation of the boundary between the
Japanese and Ainu realms in Hokkaido, the
Matsumae authorities forced the Ainu to
exchange their salmon, bear pelts, and other
goods for Japanese commodities at trading
posts established along the Hokkaido coast
that were accessible only to boats belonging
to the lord, his leading retainers, and their
merchant agents. By monopolizing Ainu
contacts with Japan, the domain sought not
only to maximize its economic advantage but
also to secure its own legitimacy within the
early modern state as the sole custodian of
relations with the Ainu (Walker 1996).
This restriction of trade naturally caused
great dissatisfaction among the Ainu,- indeed,
trade conflicts had long characterized relations
between the two peoples. Beginning with
Koshamain's Rebellion of 1456-58, significant
hostilities occurred in 1512-15, 1528-31, and
frequently throughout the period from the
mid-1620s to the mid-1650s. At the same time,
competing regional groups of Ainu fought
frequently among themselves between the late
1640s and mid-1660s. This intermittent
conflict culminated in Shakushain's War of
12.1 Ainu Man
with Bow and Sword

Most Ainu-e were painted in the
eighteenth and early nineteenth

The termfuzoku is often translated as
"customs," but here it refers specifically to
elements of outward appearance, such as

1669, a largely unsuccessful attempt to assert
economic independence from Japan.
Shakushain, a chieftain from the

centuries when the image of the

hairstyle, clothing, and personal ornamenta¬

Hidaka region, led a loose alliance of Ainu in

fierce, independent Ainu was still

tion. Fuzoku were interpreted in relation to

a series of battles against Matsumae during

fresh in the minds of the Japanese.

Japanese ideas of civilization (kn) and barbar¬

the latter half of 1669. The purpose of the

ism (i), which were connected in turn to

conflict was not to sever relations with
Japan—imported commodities were far too

This illustration from Curious Sights

of Ezo Island (1799) by Shimanojo
Murakami was painted only a decade

notions of social order within the core polity

after the last Ainu armed rebellion on

(fig. 12.1). One's fuzoku marked one as either

important to the Ainu economy for that—

Kunashiri in 1789. (NMNH 392,023)

"civilized" or "barbarian" and hence either a

but rather to break Matsumae's monopoly on

member of the core polity or alien to it: to be

trade,- the domain had closed off access to

12.2 Sword and Hanger
Ainu men treasured swords (emush)

civilized was to be "Japanese" in the sense of

northern Honshu, raised rice prices, and

above all other possessions but used

being the shogun's subject. More fluid than

otherwise pressed its advantage against the

them only for ceremonial and ritual

ethnicity yet less simple than a reflection of

Ainu. The war effort was hampered by

subjecthood,/nzokn incorporated elements of

Shakushain's inability to unify the Ainu

purposes. Most swords had compli¬
cated histories. The blades were
imported from Japan and were then

both ethnic and national identity without

under his leadership, but it was probably

often engraved with special personal

being completely equivalent to either. Because

doomed from the beginning, inasmuch as the

symbols (shiroshi), such as this killer-

fuzoku were explicitly superficial markers of

shogunate, with its massive military resources,

dress and deportment, the boundary they

stood ready to intervene on Matsumae's

scabbards were made and decorated

marked between "barbarism" and "civilization"

behalf. In any case, the defeat resulted in a

by the owner or Japanese artisans,

could be displaced relatively easily and hence

new relationship between the Ainu and the

and the Ainu man’s wife or a close

manipulated and reinterpreted for political

state, in which both political organization

whale symbol, by Japanese
metalsmiths in Hokkaido. Hafts and

female relative would weave the
hanger strap (emushat). (BMS
C18783A/B)

purposes In fact, this occurred in the 1850s

and economic activity were subordinated to

and 1 860s, when many Ainu were summarily

Japanese power.

12 /AINU AND EARLY JAPANESE STATE

97

Relations between Matsumae and the

physical separation of subsistence activities

Ainu after Shakushain's War were organized

and trade. Inland kotaii (communities of no

around rituals that originated in Ainu culture

more than a handful of households each)

but were reinvented to fit the political needs of

served as the focus of basic subsistence

the domain. One of the most important rituals

activities such as salmon fishing, deer and

was the uimam, in which Ainu leaders presented

bear hunting, and the gathering of edible

gifts to the lord of Matsumae at his castle and

plants. This is the Ainu economy familiar to

received Japanese commodities in exchange.

readers of the classic ethnographic literature,

The Japanese assumed that the word uimam was

which generally recreates the world of the

a corruption of the Japanese omemie (audience).

kotan as it existed in the late nineteenth

They saw the relationship as a tributary one in

century. In a similar way, trade was centered

which the Ainu presented themselves before

at points of contact with neighboring

the lord in a display of submission and

peoples: in addition to their trade with the

received gifts as signs of the lord's munificence.

Japanese, the Hokkaido Ainu obtained goods

In contrast, in Ainu the word refers simply to

from Manchuria and China via the Sakhalin

trade, without any of the subservient overtones

Ainu and sea-mammal pelts from the Kurile

of the Japanese omemie. The contradiction

Ainu. While they retained some of these trade

between the Japanese and Ainu interpretations

goods for themselves, most were exchanged

of the uimam and similar rituals was never

for Japanese commodities (H. Watanabe

resolved,- instead, constructive mutual misun¬

1972,- Iwasaki 1998).

derstanding guided relations (fig 12.3). The

Under the post-Shakushain order, the
balance between the two parts of the Ainu
economy shifted considerably as trade took on
a new and very different character. Change
began in the early eighteenth century as
Japanese entrepreneurs established commercial
fisheries at the domain's coastal trading posts
(Howell 1995). The fisheries relied upon Ainu
labor to process kelp, salmon, and most
importantly herring, which produced a
commercial fertilizer for use on farms in
western Honshu. By century's end the fisheries
and the tax revenues they generated had
become the backbone of the Matsumae
economy and their operators among the most
powerful figures in the domain. Although Ainu
in northern and eastern Hokkaido remained at
the center of interregional trade networks, for
most others wage labor at the fisheries

12.3

Defeat and Oppression

After Ainu autonomy in Ezo was
suppressed by Japanese military
power, interactions between the

Matsumae authorities were able to confirm the

replaced the exchange of commodities as the

legitimacy of their role as intermediary

principal form of economic engagement with

between the Ainu and the Japanese state by

Japan. Rather than cash wages, Ainu workers—

Ainu and Japanese were struc¬

playing the role of benevolent overlords, while

the men operating boats and nets and the

tured by regular meetings. The

the Ainu could play down the hard realities of

women processing herring-meal fertilizer—

Japanese called these uimam

Japanese political dominance and instead

received payment in kind, mostly rice,

emphasize the economic benefits of trade

tobacco, cloth, and sake.

(audiences), while the Ainu
interpreted this term to mean
"trade" as it had in previous
centuries. However, this detail
from Curious Sights of Ezo

Island by Shimanojo Murakami
leaves no doubt about political
reality. (HML)

98

(Howell 1994).

The fishing industry expanded rapidly

Trade—or at least the acquisition of

after the 1 830s, attracting tens of thousands

Japanese commodities—was critical to the

of Japanese immigrants to Hokkaido. By the

maintenance of Ainu society. Imported

time the Tokugawa regime collapsed, there

ironware and cloth were indispensable

were perhaps 60,000 Japanese permanently

elements of everyday life,- swords and

resident in Hokkaido, mostly in Matsumae's

lacquerware (figs. 12.4-12.6) were prized as

home territory but increasingly in Ezochi as

treasure (ikor); and sake was used in many

well, several thousand more came from

religious practices. For centuries the Ainu had

Honshu each spring to work for two or three

maintained a dual economy marked by the

months in the herring fishery. (In contrast,

HISTORIC PERIOD / D

HOWELL

Lacquerware Container

the Ainu population at the time was about

authority structure was modeled after that of

Early in their contact with the

20,000.) The steady influx of Japanese into

Japanese agricultural villages. Over time the

12.4

Japanese the Ainu adopted the

Hokkaido rendered the political border

camps evolved into permanent settlements,-

possessions in large lacquerware

between the Japanese and Ainu realms nearly

indeed, many of the best-known modern Ainu

containers, which were acquired

meaningless, particularly after 1855 when

communities, such as Shiraoi, were originally

by trading fish, fur, and other

travel restrictions between the two parts of

founded alongside Japanese fisheries. These

Hokkaido were eliminated. To an extent the

coastal communities became the focal point of

them to be treasures, and they

Ainu were able to maintain their dual economy

all relations with the Japanese. Ainu headmen

displayed them prominently at

even in the face of this development because

performed the umusa, or "greeting," ritual (a

feasts and ceremonies. (BMS

the Japanese newcomers settled exclusively on

local counterpoint to the uimam) with the

Japanese custom of storing their

products. These containers were
so important that Ainu considered

C18759)

the coast, leaving inland districts to the Ainu

fishery operators and traveled to the castle

and their traditional subsistence patterns. This

town annually for uimam with the Matsumae

changed, however, once the Meiji regime took

lord. Thus, although inland kotan remained

power in 1868 and encouraged hundreds of

intact (if sparsely populated much of the year),

thousands of Japanese to colonize the interior.
During the fishing season Ainu workers

they became thoroughly invisible to the
Japanese authorities. This worked to the Ainu's

lived in camps set up near the fisheries. These

advantage insofar as it allowed them to

communities, with populations ranging from

maintain a realm autonomous of Japanese

several dozen to several hundred inhabitants,

interference, but at the same time it meant

were much larger than the inland kotan, and their

that the fisheries were the sole legitimate

12 / AINU AND EARLY JAPANESE STATE

99

on the coast for months at a time necessarily
disrupted traditional subsistence patterns at
the inland kotan—so much so that Matsumae
officials became seriously concerned that
Ainu would starve when rice shipments to
Hokkaido were curtailed during a period of
crop failures in the 1830s (Howell 1995: 45).
This is not to say that Ainu culture became
less vital as a result of its growing engagement
with the Japanese commercial economy,- on
the contrary, there is ample evidence that the
culture underwent remarkable development
during the period of greatest Japanese
pressure. A case in point is the evolution of
the iyomante (bear-sending ceremony),
considered by some anthropologists to be the
defining ritual practice of the Ainu people. In
its best-known form, a bear cub was captured
and raised in a kotan for a year or more before
being returned to the land of the gods laden
with gifts,- Ainu from nearby kotan and
neighboring river systems gathered for the
festivities, which lasted for several days.
Archaeological and documentary evidence
suggests that this variety of iyomante did not
emerge until around the end of the eighteenth
century—about the time that commercial
fishing began drawing significant numbers of
Ainu into wage labor. The iyomante may have
evolved as an expression of cultural solidarity in
response to the loss of political organization
that followed Shakushain's defeat and the threat
to regional ties that accompanied the rise of the
fishery (H. Watanabe 1972,- LItagawa 1989,Sasaki 1990,- Irimoto 1992a).
The integration of Hokkaido into the
12.5

“Treasure”

This handsome container is one of the
finest from Ainu collections in North

point of contact with the Japanese state and

Japanese economy was paralleled in the

economy. Dominated as they were by Japanese

nineteenth century by a move toward political

entrepreneurs, the fisheries were hardly ideal

integration. Russian ships began appearing

collectors working before 1920 did not

institutions upon which to build a stable

regularly in the waters off Hokkaido during

collect lacquerware because they con¬

economic relationship. Without alternative

the last quarter of the eighteenth century, and

sidered them Japanese rather than

sources of necessary commodities, however,

the shogunate became sufficiently concerned

the Ainu had no choice but to accommodate

about Russian ambitions in northeast Asia to

themselves to labor at the fisheries.

assume direct control over much of Hokkaido

American museums. Most museum

Ainu, but collections made after 1920
often contain such pieces. By this time
the Ainu had already sold most of their
traditional artifacts that were perceived
as "Ainu" and were forced to sell their
last "treasures.” (BMS C18799)

too

Although fishery labor gave the Ainu

in 1799. The threat quickly subsided, thanks to

access to a far greater volume of Japanese

Napoleon and other troubles in Europe, and

commodities than in the past, gaining this

the shogunate discontinued its direct adminis¬

access exacted a heavy toll on their society.

tration policy in 1821. However, it took over

Living in relatively large groups and in close

again in 1 855, shortly after abandoning its

proximity to Japanese fisheries meant that

"seclusion" policies in the face of Western

epidemic diseases like smallpox and measles

pressure. Hakodate, a port in southern

could wipe out entire populations in a very

Hokkaido, was opened to foreign ships, and a

short time. Ainu women were vulnerable to

treaty was concluded with Russia that set a

the sexual predations of Japanese supervisors,

border between the two nations in the Kurile

and all Ainu were subjected to physical abuse

Islands but left Sakhalin held jointly. (A second

and other mistreatment. Moreover, remaining

treaty, in 1875, gave Russia all of Sakhalin in

HISTORIC PERIOD/ D.

HOWELL

12.6. “A Couple of the Chief”

This Japanese postcard shows an Ainu

exchange for Japanese sovereignty over the

similar program had been implemented briefly

entire Kurile chain.)

in areas of possible Russian contact (such as

man and his wife posed in ceremonial
garments with mats, hanging inaw, and

The treaty with Russia notwithstanding,

Etorofu in the southern Kuriles) during the

lacquerware “treasures.” Such indoor

the shogunate felt compelled to assert Japanese

first period of direct administration. Although

photographs were rarely taken by

sovereignty over Hokkaido in a way that the

the officials sometimes succeeded in getting

Western powers would understand—that is,

half or more of the members of a community

museum collectors, who usually lacked
flash equipment and fast film. This
image was probably shot ca. 1900 by
a Japanese photographer who was
better prepared and could afford to
stage scenes and pay the subjects.

by eliminating the distinction between Japan

to cooperate, most quickly reverted to their

proper and Ezochi and instead incorporating

accustomed ways after the officials had

all of Hokkaido into the core polity. Insofar

departed, and many others fled inland rather

as the core polity represented the realm of

than risk the forced assimilation that occurred

Japanese "civilization," making Ezochi "Japanese"

in some areas. Needless to say, the policy did

(NAA 27707.02)

required civilizing it first. This was accomplished

not succeed in getting significant numbers of

through the nominal assimilation of the Ainu,

Ainu to assimilate into Japanese society—but

a feat accomplished by adjusting their "barbar-

complete assimilation was never the goal

ian"fuzoku to conform to Japanese notions of

(Howell 1994).

"civilized" appearance. Beginning in 1855,

The collapse of the Tokugawa regime

shogun officials traveled along the coast of

in 1868 transformed both the Ainu place in

Ezochi offering material rewards to Ainu men

the Hokkaido economy and their relation¬

who would consent to "assimilate" by shaving

ship to the Japanese state. Ainu continued to

their beards and pates, wearing their hair in

work in the fisheries, but with the arrival of

topknots, and taking Japanese-style names. A

thousands of new Japanese fishermen every
year their labor was no longer necessary to
the industry's survival. Inland kotan eventually
came under assault from Japanese immigrants
who occupied Ainu lands as part of the state's
agricultural and industrial development
policies. At the same time, the new regime
cut off all ritual relations with the Ainu,
including the uimam, and instead declared
them to be "former aborigines" (kyudojin) and
as such the object of policies designed to
deny the validity of their non-Japanese
identities and hasten their eventual integra¬
tion into Japanese society as loyal imperial
subjects. As a result, the Ainu lost the
measure of autonomy they had enjoyed
during the early modern period and came
instead to occupy a new position as an ethnic
minority (Howell 1997).

12 /AINU AND EARLY JAPANESE STATE

101

M

uch of the modern research

Foreign
Contagions,
Ainu Medical
Culture, and
Conquest
Brett L. Walker

Foreign contagions influenced Ainu

on the Ainu explores the

society and culture both ecologically and

political and commercial

culturally. Foreign contagions hastened social

implications of early contact

dislocation within Ainu communities and

between Japanese and Ainu in northern Japan.

transformed traditional Ainu medical culture.

But one important aspect of this early contact

The Ainu believed contagions to be kamuy, or

has remained basically ignored in historical

to possess godlike qualities (albeit an evil god,

literature: the ecological and cultural impact

nitsue kamuy), and this belief shaped the rituals

of foreign contagions in Ainu lands. Environ¬

and medicines Ainu healers used to combat

mental historian Alfred Crosby has observed

afflictions (fig. 13.1). Indeed, the effect of

(1986: 2 14) that "disease can tag along with

foreign contagions and the transformation of

commerce just as effectively as with any other

Ainu medical culture was an important

kind of human intercourse," and as Japanese

outcome of early contacts between Japanese

penetrated Ainu lands to acquire animal skins

and the Ainu and had a major role in shaping

and fish products for trade, they introduced

the history of this region of northern Japan.

such contagions as smallpox, measles, and
syphilis, which decimated Ainu populations in

Foreign Contagions and Ecological

the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

Contact

These foreign contagions did more than
simply affect Ainu demographics,- they also
killed Ainu elders and ritual leaders who were
the repositories of cultural traditions, folklore,
and hunting techniques and thus weakened
the ability of the Ainu to withstand Japanese
economic and military pressure (Walker
1997). Similar to what Richard White (1983:
13.1 Exorcising Illness
The exorcism of evil gods thought

208) has observed of some Native American

to cause sickness is the subject of

nations, with the onslaught of such foreign

this Ainu-e from Curious Sights of

contagions as smallpox, "people were dying,

Ezo Island (1799) by Shimanojo

but so too were the basic elements of their

Murakami. The ritual includes
singing, dancing, and vertical

cultural order." The same might be said of the

slashing of swords meant to ‘‘cut

Ainu during this early period of political and

evil spirits from above.” (HML)

commercial contact with the Japanese.

Medical historians have traced a basic
chronology and a somewhat blurry geo¬
graphic pattern of disease dissemination in
F4okkaido (Matsuki 1973: 124-31,- T.
Takahashi 1988: 78-98,- Walker 1997:
chap. 5). This pattern reveals that foreign
contagions first appeared—possibly as early
as the fifteenth century—in Japanese
population centers called Wajinchi (literally,
"Japanese land") or Ningenchi ("land of
human beings [i.e. Ainu]") located on the
southern tip of the Oshima Peninsula. By
the mid-seventeenth century, epidemics like
smallpox occurred more frequently and slid
into a deadly twenty-year cycle. Moreover,
between 1624 and 1862, about nineteen
recorded epidemics broke out in F~lokkaido,
leaving scores of both Japanese and Ainu
dead. A series of memorandums concerning a
smallpox epidemic that hit the Shizunai/
Mitsuishi region in 1845 reveals that death
rates could easily exceed 60 percent in an
Ainu community even when steps were taken
by physicians to stem the tide of the
epidemic (Walker 1997: 284, Appendix C).
Denjuro Matsuda, a Japanese official,
offered a glimpse of the social dislocation
sparked by such epidemics as smallpox as
well as the relationship between trade and
the dissemination of foreign contagions in
Ainu lands. In the case of an 1800 epidemic
in eastern FJokkaido, he noted that smallpox
had been introduced to the village of Usu by
a low-ranking Japanese warrior and an Ainu
trader from Oshamanbe who were trading
fur seals there. One common Ainu response
to smallpox (and to death from other
diseases) was to burn the house where a

102

historic period/ b

walker

in 1793 that Ainu prostitutes in the Ishikari
region sold themselves to Japanese traders,
while in Hakodate Japanese prostitutes sold
themselves to Ainu men (K. Kimura 1983:
83,- Kaiho 1992: 210). Like epidemic
diseases, sexual exploitation appears to have
transcended ethnic and cultural boundaries
along these northern contact points. Rape
was also fairly common and frequently
contributed to the spread of foreign dis¬
eases. Takeshiro Matsuura, another Japanese
official, noted in 1858 how a Japanese
fishery supervisor infected a twenty-nineyear-old Ainu woman with syphilis after
13.2

Spiny-Blowfish Amulet

victim had died, but the Ainu in Usu allowed

The spiny blowfish (ikaripopo) carries
a fatal poison, but this does not deter

ten days—about the incubation period for

Japanese from eating blowfish

smallpox—to elapse before burning the

prepared by trusted master chefs.

house where the two men had died, and the

This deadly fish was known also to

disease spread quickly throughout the village.

the Ainu, who used its desiccated
body as an amulet against disease.

Matsuda wrote that once the disease began to

Other animals and herbs were also

spread "without exception [the inhabitants of

used as amulets against sickness or

Usu] took cover in the surrounding moun¬

such natural disasters as earth¬

tains, dispersing in various directions" to

quakes and tidal waves. (AMS,
Kodama Collection 61049)

escape the deadly scourge, but many simply
"died in their tracks." In the neighboring
village of Horobetsu, he observed Ainu
frantically smearing kettle soot on their faces
and running frantically into the mountains.
Matsuda estimated that of the 250 Ainu living
in Usu, about forty (or 16 percent) died in the
epidemic (Sakakura 1943: 4: 98-99). This

forcing her husband to work at a distant
herring fishery. He then refused to grant her
medical attention or even basic sustenance
(Matsuura 1977b: 3: 19). Matsuura noted
elsewhere that of forty-one Japanese fishery
supervisors in Kushiro, thirty-six had taken
Ainu women as "concubines" after sending
their husbands to work at the neighboring
Akkeshi fishery (ibid. 158). Alfred Crosby has
observed (1986) that syphilis is "important
in the history of a people in jeopardy,
because it cripples their ability to reproduce,"
and no doubt it thrived in the exploitative
environment of Hokkaido. Foreign conta¬
gions such as smallpox and syphilis were
among the first exchanges between the Ainu
and the Japanese.

pattern of hiding in the mountains would
become a standard response to foreign

Foreign Contagions and

contagions in Hokkaido.

Cultural Contact

Smallpox was not the only contagion
brought to Ainu lands by Japanese traders.

The Ainu response to such contagions as
smallpox and syphilis can be traced to how

The normalization of contact between

they contextualized diseases within their

Japanese and Ainu in the seventeenth century

cultural order. The Ainu believed diseases

also facilitated the emergence of other

were kamuy, or cognate godlike essences, that

infections as well. Commercial growth in

communed between Ainu mosir, the temporal

ports located in southern Hokkaido—such as

world, and kamuy mosir, the metaphysical world

Esashi, Matsumae, and Hakodate—led to a

inhabited by gods and ancestors. The natural

rise in prostitution and a subsequent increase

world, as the Ainu construed it, was teeming

in such sexually transmitted diseases as

with kamuy, which assumed many forms. Such

syphilis. Recently, archaeologists have

rituals as the iyomante or the "sending away" of

pointed out that syphilis might have been

a bear cub's or owl's spirit were not viewed as

introduced to Hokkaido even earlier: some

acts of cruelty,- rather, they were portals

skeletal remains excavated from

through which Ainu could directly participate

Katsuyamadate near Kaminokuni reveal

in a metaphysical plane by liberating the

lesions on skulls suggesting that syphilis

kamuy essence that was trapped in the tempo¬

might have been introduced into the Ainu

ral guise of all living things. And contagions

population as early as the mid-sixteenth

were no different. John Batchelor, an English

century (Tanda 1996: 50).
Syphilis spread easily in Hokkaido due

missionary who lived among the Ainu in the
Saru River area for half a century, from 1877

to both prostitution and rabid sexual exploita¬

to 1940, compared contemporaneous western

tion. Kenji Kimura, a Japanese observer, wrote

and Ainu notions of disease and found striking

13/FOREIGN CONTAGION

i 03

differences between them. Unlike nineteenth-

pattern of sexual predation among Japanese

century Western medical culture, which

workers in Hokkaido, also listed Ainu

portrayed disease as an "adventitious, blind,

medications to treat colds, eye infections,

irrational force," Ainu understood diseases to

"dizziness from childbirth," mouth sores,

possess a "personal and spiritual existence."

spasms, chest pains, abscesses or boils, and

Similar to other kamuy, he wrote, diseases could

even nosebleeds (figs. 13.2, 13.3, 13.4). He

"think, will, and act" (Batchelor 1901: 108).

noted that the Ainu also commonly used

Of the kamuy that dominated the

eburiko, a lichen that grows on pine trees (Ainu

metaphysical and temporal landscapes of Ainu

siw karus or kuykarus, Fomes officinalis) and ikema,

cosmology, payoka kamuy (literally, "punishing

a milkweed (Ainu ikema,- Cynancbum caudatum)

god") was among the most feared (Sekiba

to combat certain contagions, including such

1 896: 29). The Ainu were defenseless against

epidemic diseases as smallpox. John Batchelor

the payoka kamuy who swooped into their lives

and his research collaborator Kingo Miyabe

bringing the ultimate punishment—ravaging

wrote that Ainu believed ikema to be among

disease. That some Ainu folklore (uepekere)

the most effective remedies against smallpox.

identifies human abuse of certain small birds as

Ikema was so potent that if it was chewed up

the source of smallpox outbreaks indicates how

and the juice was blown from the mouth over

seriously such transgressions against nature

the victims or even blown throughout the

were viewed (Batchelor 1924: 29). To deal with

infected area, it could drive away payoka

payoka kamuy, shamans, called uepotarakur, who

kamuy (Batchelor and Miyabe 1893: 208).

were diviners and physicians, administered

Although it is not known where the knowl¬

medicines, carved special inaw (sacred shaved

edge of these medicinal plants originated,
some medical historians argue that eburiko,

13.3

Influenza Amulet

which was widely used by Chinese, was likely

Because Ainu believed that illnesses
were caused by specific evil gods,

introduced to the Ainu through early contact

protection also had to be specific.

with the East Asian continent (Yamagishi

Bronislaw Pilsudski photographed this

1996: 82-85). As other essays in this volume

Ainu amulet against influenza in

suggest, the Ainu communicated with people

Sakhalin, ca. 1903-05. The amulet
consisted of a carved tree stump

throughout Northeast Asia and the North

combining aspects of inaw, the shaved

Pacific via cultural and commercial networks.

sticks used to carry messages to the

Along with administering medicines,

gods, with ikupasuy, men's sacred

shamans played the dominant role in exorcis¬

prayer sticks. The tufted upper part
identified the god of influenza; the

ing contagions from the bodies of the

horizontal cuts at either end of the

afflicted. Norihiro Matsumae noted in a

vertical slash identified the Ainu

1715 letter to the central government that to

sender. (NAA 47446)

combat dangerous diseases, Ainu "priests"
conjure up "miracles" through elaborate
"exorcisms" (Matsumae 1982: 135-36).
Later, in the early twentieth century, Neil
sticks), and oversaw the process of exorcising
dangerous kamuy from the bodies of victims.

many years among the Nibutani Ainu and

The shaman-curers believed that the effective¬

who researched Ainu exorcisms, offered more

ness of medicines depended on their ability to

detailed observations. He wrote that Ainu

repulse contagions from the body, and these

used such terms as kasikik, "striking down from

various remedies included both plant and

above," to describe the process of exorcising

animal by-products (Sekiba 1896: 5).

payoka kamuy from the body. In preparation

In 1688, for example, Japanese aboard

104

Munro, a Scottish physician who lived for

for exorcisms, Ainu shamans crafted sinna inaw

the Kaiju-maru, a ship dispatched by the lord

(abnormal ritual pieces) and constructed

of Mito domain, observed Ainu who were

"houses of evil" from sticks, which they used

infected with disease eating bear gallbladders.

to hold the payoka kamuy after it was expelled

In 1715 Norihiro Matsumae, the lord of

from the victim. Shamans also built traps

Matsumae domain, noted that Ainu used fur-

from hollow plants like kuttar (Polygonum

seal gallbladders and even whale feces to

sachalinensis) for the purpose of capturing evil

combat certain afflictions (Matsumae 1982:

spirits, in other cases, they beat infected

1 35-36,-Tsuda 1988: 26). In his 1858 report,

people with switches of bush clover (sinkep)

Takeshiro Matsuura, who had observed a

and sometimes made cuts in the body to "let

HISTORIC PERIOD / B. WALKER

13.5

Prayer Stick

A man’s prayer stick (ikupasuy),
used in rituals to send messages to
the gods, was carved with precise

the bad blood out" (Munro 1962: 99-102).

named Iruekashi who, with little regard

John Batchelor, a contemporary of Munro's,

for payoka kamuy, wandered through the

described an exorcism he had observed first

markings and forms. Images in the

hand: the shaman "was in a trance and much

central panel were left to the carver’s

excited. His eyes were wide open, but they

discretion, but the transverse cuts at

appeared to be glazed over with a sort of film,

the ends were special clan or family

devastated village, surveying the wide¬
spread death and social dislocation
touched off by the epidemic. He came
across some children who had also
survived the epidemic, and he cautioned

and he seemed to be looking far away into the

them that "people who die of this disease

recognize the sender of the message.

world of spirits, without seeing anything

called smallpox are not like the people

(BMA 12.229)

material" (Batchelor 1927: 277).

who die from other ailments. People who

markings that allowed the gods to

Shamans needed to gaze "far away into
the world of spirits" to deal with smallpox
because the cosmological and ancestral
implications of this form of death were so

die from smallpox do not go to the place
of our ancestors." He said that they roam
the earth in the form of ghosts, spreading
disease to other unsuspecting villages
(Kayano 1987: 53).

high. Munro wrote that the Ainu understood
Once somebody had succumbed to
payoka kamuy—as they almost always did with
death rates over 60 percent—family members
took care to dispose of the body and burn the
house where the victim had died, while still
showing some reverence toward the dead
(figs. 13.6, 13.7). In 1737, for example,
Genjiro Sakakura, a surveyor from a Japanese
gold-mining firm, wrote that when threatened
by epidemics, Ainu abandoned the infected
and ran into the mountains. They did not
return, he added, until the victim had died,family members then covered the body in
attush, a fabric made from elm bark, and
carried it into the mountains. Upon return¬
ing to the village they burned the house to
the ground and built another in its place
(Sakakura 1943: 4: 410). Because the Ainu
understood smallpox to be a wrathful kamuy,
it is hardly surprising that they chose to
evade contagions by hiding in the mountains
and then burning the home.
people who died from smallpox were destined
13.4

Smallpox Amulet

Pilsudski took this photograph of two
Sakhalin Ainu standing beside an

6

amulet against smallpox in about
1905. The specific form of the inaw

Payoka kamuy transcended the boundary

to wander the earth in the form of ghosts,

between temporal and metaphysical worlds,

(tukap), touching off other epidemics rather
,i
,•
•
.i
ui
j
r, u
.
»
than resting in the land of the ancestors

of linking to the spiritual world, experiment¬

(Munro 1962: 99-102). This concept has

and exorcising them required a combination

ing with a variety of medicines, or finally
simply hiding in the mountains. Even while

at the top identified the god who was

been incorporated in folk legend that is

being petitioned, in this case, the

expressed in a story from the Nibutani region

in the mountains, however, Ainu were

god who brought smallpox, carvings
like those on an ikupasuy identified

recounted by the Ainu cultural and political

constantly threatened by starvation and

the petitioner. (NAA 47425)

leader, Shigeru Kayano:
Long ago an outbreak of smallpox in

death from exposure. As they viewed it, they
were not hiding from diseases, but from

Nibutani killed so many Ainu that the

spirits who terrorized the realms of their

village of Kankan was virtually annihilated.

consciousness with no regard for human life

Among the survivors was an elderly man

or their ancestors. Payoka kamuy left even the

13 /FOREIGN CONTAGION

10 5

13.6

Caring for a Corpse

In Sakhalin, caring for the dead was a
task usually assigned to a low-ranking
woman; it generally required at least a
year of attention and monitoring. In this
illustration from Rinzo Mamiya’s Illus¬

trations of Northern Ezo (1855) a
woman approaches a burial scaffold
containing a corpse wrapped in a birchbark shroud. (HML)

13.7

Burning the House

of the Deceased

Burial customs varied regionally
among the Ainu. In some areas the
deceased's house was burned and
the dwelling site was abandoned.
This illustration from Shimanojo
Murakami's Curious Sights of Ezo

Island (1799) shows mourners griev¬
ing beside the deceased’s posses¬
sions. (HML)

most powerful elders feverish and in pain and
littered the faces of the young with festering

(Shirayama 1971: 35-36). These numbers are

pustules. There seemed to be no defenses

even more striking at a regional level

from such diseases at their disposal; the Ainu

Akkeshi, once a thriving Ainu community in

increasingly began to realize that they were

eastern Hokkaido, experienced a 75 percent

powerless against this invisible spiritual and

decline between 1809 and 1856, from 874 to

physical scourge.

217 inhabitants (Matsuura 1977b: 3: 424).

The dramatic social and cultural effects

106

percent, nearly 1 percent per year, to 15,171

Akkeshi had been recognized as a powerful

of breeching the epidemiologic boundaries in

community because it had challenged the

northern Japan is reflected in population data:

Japanese in 1789—with the help of neighbor¬

between 1807, when a government census

ing groups seventy-one Japanese were killed

estimated the population of Hokkaido Ainu at

in two quick assaults—but it evoked an

26,256, and 1854, the population declined 43

entirely different image by the end of the

HISTORIC PERIOD / B

WALKER

13.8

Ritual Sword

In some areas Ainu men owned small
ritual swords (pon emush) that they
kept under their pillows to ward off

nineteenth century. A. Henry Savage Landor,

the north, but it was not enough to stem the

a self-proclaimed English adventurer, wrote of

painful effects of disease on Ainu society.

the Akkeshi Ainu that "few of them are left

Gradually, over the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries Ainu began to lose faith

illness; such swords were also

now, and those few are indeed poor speci¬

charms, believed to ensure that

mens of their race. They have nearly all

in the medical practices devised over

one’s wife gave birth to a son. Some

become bald, and they seem to suffer very

centuries to deal with "native" infections.

severely from Rheumatism" (1893).

These practices were found to be insufficient

of these swords were simply pieces
of carved wood encased in a birchbark sheath. (MPM N17053)

This epidemiological history reveals that

to combat the new contagions that were

Ainu society underwent widespread upheaval

introduced through increased contact with

and dislocation as a result of foreign conta¬

Japanese and other populations with whom

gions, compelling scholars to reexamine the

the Ainu were in contact for trade on the

early contact between Ainu and Japanese to

Asian continent. At risk was more than their

understand how native Ainu lands were

health alone: faith in their traditional

conquered by the Japanese. Nineteenth-

cosmology, in the ability of their shamans to

century descriptions of the Ainu, many by

protect them from disease or to exorcise evil

foreign observers, stress their "amiable,"

spirits, and in the ability of their elders and

"submissive," and even "loathsome" physical

their ceremonies to find accommodation

traits (Capron 1875: 266,- Landor 1893: 42),

with the gods were all factors that contrib¬

but their history suggests that, to the extent

uted to the accumulated cultural erosion

such characterizations were valid at all, these

from loss of maritime trade, of lands and

attributes may have developed partly under

subsistence resources, and of a stable

the influence of rampant diseases. The Ainu

population. So weakened, having lost their

vigorously contested Japanese expansion in

independence and capability of self-determi¬

southern Hokkaido on nine different occa¬

nation, the Ainu were increasingly unable to

sions between 1456 and 1536, before such

resist the growing Japanese power over their

diseases as smallpox could get a foothold

lives and lands. Although much work remains

(Takakura 1942: 26); however, foreign

to be done to clarify Ainu medical practice,

contagions dismantled any hope of Ainu

historical demography, and epidemiology as it

resistance in the face of Japanese conquerors,

relates not only to Japan but to contacts with

despite new efforts by Ainu medical experts to

the continent, it is now apparent that disease

treat these deadly infections. Ainu culture

and foreign contagions played an important

proved dynamic, reinventing itself to meet

role in the Ainu decline and the Japanese

the needs of a changing disease ecology in

domination of their native lands.

13 / FOREIGN CONTAGION

107

I

n 1899 the Japanese government

14/From
Assimilation to
Indigenous
Rights:
Ainu Resistance
Since 1869
Richard Siddle

hunters were forced to become farmers, and

enacted the Hokkaido Former Aborigi¬

half of the evacuees died within five years.

nes Protection Act. Informed by social

The survivors found what solace they could

Darwinist perceptions of a "dying race''

by stubbornly clinging to their Orthodox

of "former natives," this legislation aimed to

Christianity (itself a legacy of Russian

manage and control the hapless Ainu who had

colonialism dating from the 1730s) despite

been swept aside in the "struggle for survival."

attempts to convert them to Buddhism.

It was no coincidence that such discourse and

The largest relocation involved 841

legislation resembled "native policy" in North

Ainu from Karafuto (Sakhalin) who were

America and Australasia,- Japanese colonial

transported to Hokkaido after their homeland

officials had investigated such measures, and

became Russian territory as a result of the

popular social Darwinism was a permanent

1 875 Treaty of St. Petersburg. Contemporary

feature of the Japanese intellectual landscape

accounts record Ainu anger at being forced to

(Siddle 1996). Colonial policy had destroyed

settle in swampy ground at Tsuishikari near

the Ainu way of life as immigrants moved into

Sapporo and take up farming, but despite their

Ainu lands and traditional settlements were

numbers they were unable to resist the move.

broken up and relocated and as deer and

Disease soon took its toll, especially the

salmon were hunted almost to extinction. The

smallpox and cholera epidemics of 1886 and

consequent destitution, apathy, and despair of

1887, which claimed more than three hundred

Ainu communities only served to reinforce

lives. The attempt to turn the Ainu into model

official and popular perceptions of a "dying

citizens in Tsuishikari eventually failed,

race." The Ainu did not appear to have the

however, in the face of passive Ainu refusal to

energy to resist their extinction.

cooperate. Many men left to work as fishermen
or returned to Russian Sakhalin, with or
without passports. When 336 Ainu returned to
Karafuto after victory in the Russo-Japanese
war in 1905, only twenty-seven remained in
Hokkaido (M. Kono 1996).
There was considerable passive resis¬
tance to farming and acculturation. Unfamil¬
iarity with farming techniques was not the
only reason why many Ainu failed to work
their granted lands. Practices such as manur¬
ing, for instance, offended religious taboos on
cleanliness, and most Ainu men preferred to
continue in their traditional seasonal patterns
as hunters or work on the colonial survey
teams in the interior. Although the mode of
life that underlay the traditional animistic
spirituality had been destroyed, the Ainu
were reluctant to abandon their beliefs. Even

14.1

Protest March

During the twentieth century the social
and economic conditions of the Ainu

The Movement Against

when certain ceremonial practices were

the Protection Act

discontinued they lived on in children's games

Most Ainu settlements were small and

(M. Ogawa 1993). In a survey as late as 1931,

scattered, and protest against early Ainu

the Hokkaido government reported that

have worsened, but beginning in the
1960s a new activist generation took
to the streets to gain rights that had
been denied in the endless struggles
to revoke the 1899 Hokkaido Former

policy under such conditions was not easy,

nearly half of all Ainu households—1,648 out

even when whole communities were affected.

of 3,417—still adhered to "natural religion"

When the authorities were determined they

(Hokkaido-cho 1934: 343).

Aborigines Protection Act. Protest
marches like this one, which took

acted firmly. In 1884 the ninety-four Ainu

Organized Ainu political resistance did

place in Sapporo in November 1989,

residents of Shumushu island in the Kuriles

attracted wide public attention. Ainu

were forcibly relocated to the distant island of

Individuals reacted to the stress of their

Shikotan. After being ordered to slaughter all

collapsing world in different ways: many

their dogs, they were herded on board the

sought refuge in alcohol, some were provoked

costumes were worn to assert identity:

not emerge in the early colonial period.

previously Ainu had sought to blend
into Japanese society rather than
accentuate their differences.

108

vessel sent to transport them, and from the

into outbursts of violence. A few men, like

deck they watched their village go up in

Monsuke Ota (Montereku), adapted to the

flames. On unfamiliar Shikotan these northern

colonists and their ways and became land-

HISTORIC PERIOD/ R. SIDDLE

owners, and some even became wealthy. Only

Adjusting my necktie, I glance at my face

one educated young Ainu, Taro Kannari, was

The mirror tells me

influenced by the currents of liberal political
opposition in 1880s Japan, and he attempted
to campaign for improved education and
welfare for the Ainu people. His efforts were
rewarded with opposition from traditionoriented Ainu elders, and he sank into
alcoholism and despair, dying in 1897 at the
age of thirty. The only real exception to this
trend was the successful political struggle in
1900 of the Ainu community of Chikabumi,
near Asahikawa, to protect their reservation

You are Ainu, after all
(Iboshi 1930: 53)

At a time when few Ainu looked much
beyond their immediate communities, Iboshi
clearly regarded the Ainu as a unified group
linked by common ancestral and cultural
bonds and sharing common political
aspirations: a nation. Moreover, he saw the
Ainu as an indigenous people dispossessed
by a colonial state and drew parallels with
the extinction of the Tasmanian aborigines.
An important further step was taken on

from powerful business interests.
It was not until the 1920s that a small
group of educated young Ainu, united by
Christian faith and a commitment to work for
their people, began to form a small movement
under the wing of longtime British missionary
John Batchelor and his Japanese Christian allies.
Not surprisingly, their agenda was not radical
activism but the incorporation of the Ainu into
Japanese society through self-improvement. In
particular, the shoddy native education system
established by the Protection Act of 1899 (and
subsequent regulations) was seen as a means to
perpetuate Ainu subordination. Under these
influences Ainu activism in the 1920s and 1930s
focused on the abolition of native education, the
eradication of alcoholism, the improvement of
general social and economic conditions, and the
removal of the legal inequality enshrined in the

July 1, 1930, with the formation of the
Hokkaido Ainu Kyokai (Hokkaido Ainu
Association) by 1 30 Ainu delegates orga¬
nized by the Kyokumeisha, a Tokachi Ainu
self-help organization, to discuss revision of
the Protection Act. John Batchelor was
involved, and Masaaki Kita, a Japanese and
Hokkaido Government Welfare Section
bureaucrat, became the first chairman. Kita
was a champion of Ainu assimilation through
intermarriage and the fusion of blood (yucjo),
and he was able to keep the agenda largely
confined to issues of social welfare. Neverthe¬
less, over the next few years, more Ainu from
other areas began to participate in the move¬
ment and contribute articles to the journal of
the Association, Ezo no Hikiiri (The light of Ezo).
Under the wing of the Hokkaido
government, the Ainu Kyokai was led by

Protection Act.
This movement for educational reform
and the talented young men and women it
fostered found intellectual and emotional
expression through poetiy and essays pub¬
lished in the magazine of Batchelor's Ainu
Mission. Milestones in Ainu literature include
Ainu monocjatari (Ainu tales) by Tokusaburo
Takekuma, 1918,- Ainu shinyoshu (Collected
songs of the Ainu gods) by Yukie Chiri, an
Ainu girl from Chikabumi who had tragically
died of illness at the age of nineteen before
her work was published in 1923,- and Kotan
(Village) by Hokuto Iboshi, 1927. Iboshi had
devoted himself to his people but died, worn
out and wracked by tuberculosis, in 1928 at
the age of twenty-seven, but his youthful
anger against his people's subordination lives
on in hundreds of short poems. In some he
attacks colonization and its consequences,
while others display the pride he felt in his

successful Ainu, some of them wealthy, who
sincerely believed that their example of
assimilation and loyalty was the best way
forward for all Ainu. Even such a small and
powerless movement had not escaped the
eye of the repressive security apparatus of
the imperial Japanese state and some Ainu
were under police surveillance. Despite the
fact that their views on the means of Ainu
progress—assimilation—coincided with
those of Hokkaido government bureaucrats,
Ainu leaders were motivated by a genuine
determination not to be beaten by Wajin.
Even while urging an end to their heritage
they maintained their pride in it, and they
felt considerable anger toward the institu¬
tions and attitudes of majority society. As
one Ainu author concluded:
The yellow race, the white race, the
black race and the Ainu are all equal
before God. We have no need to despise

Ainu identity. In one telling poem he hints at

ourselves. . . . Rather, we must come to

the impermeability of racial barriers that

have pride in ourselves as Ainu (Hiramura

doomed attempts at assimilation:

1930: 158).

1 4 / AINU RESISTANCE SINCE

1869

109

So assimilation remained the objective

the Hokkaido government ordered the Ainu

of the Ainu Kyokai, its activities were actually

to leave in February 1900. Instead of docile

fostering a growing awareness of Ainu

compliance, however, local Ainu leaders

identity and common purpose. The Ainu

joined forces with local Wajin and opposition

Seinen Taikai (Convention of Ainu Youth), for

politicians and took their campaign to Tokyo.

instance, held in Sapporo on August 2, 1931,

After the Tokyo press exposed the shady

and organized by John Batchelor provided an

dealings of the Okuragumi, the government

opportunity for seventy young Ainu to come

canceled the order to avoid a scandal,- despite

together, exchange views, and commit

their victory, however, the Ainu were not

themselves to improving the position of their

granted the land and the Hokkaido govern¬

people. Other Ainu intellectuals also founded

ment finally leased it to Asahikawa in 1906,

small groups within the overall parameters of

ensuring that discontent among the

the self-help movement.

Chikabumi Ainu would continue to simmer.

In March 1937 the Protection Act was

In the 1930s Ainu anger erupted once more

finally revised: native schools were abolished,

with the expiration of the lease and the

restrictions on property ownership were eased,

attempt by Japanese tenants of Ainu plots to

and welfare measures were extended. But soon

gain the land for themselves.

the outbreak of World War II ensured that no

Renewed activism in Chikabumi took a

further gains would be made. Many Ainu were

somewhat different form than that of the Ainu

forced to display their loyalty by joining the

Kyokai and its agenda for revision of the

armed forces, and thirty-nine Ainu soldiers were

Protection Act. After the brief appearance in

killed in the Battle of Okinawa in 1945.

1926 of the Kaiheisha, an overtly socialistinspired organization led by Ichitaro Sunazawa,

14.2 Chikabumi Ainu Protestors

the Chikabumi Ainu activists formed another

Ichitaro Sunazawa and his wife

group in 1932 called the Kyudojin Hogoho

Peramonkoro were leaders in the pro¬

Teppai Domei (Alliance for the Abolition of the

test movements of the Chikabumi Ainu
from the 1930s to the 1960s. The

Protection Act). While most Ainu lived in dire

Sunazawas are seen here (center and

poverty, by this time Chikabumi had also

right) with their young son, Bikky, and

produced strong-minded and talented individu¬

Michi Arai, Genjiro Arai, and Kamegoro

als like Genjiro Arai, a judicial clerk, and Kaneto

Ogawa in Tokyo in June 1932. They
staged a protest arguing in favor of

Kawamura, who had overcome many obstacles

abolishing the 1899 Protection Act and

to become a successful railway surveyor. In June

seeking the return of land taken from

1932 Arai led a group of Chikabumi Ainu to

the Chikabumi Ainu. Bikky carried on
his parents' passion for Ainu rights and

Tokyo to campaign directly at the center of

became an influential political leader

power. The delegation included Ichitaro

and artist.

Sunazawa and his wife Peramonkoro and their
young son Bikky, who was later to become a

Chikabumi

reknowned artist and activist (figs. 14.2, 14.3).

The Ainu community of Chikabumi near

Although Arai and his group were harassed by

Asahikawa holds a special place in the history

the Special Higher Police, Tokyo media

of Ainu resistance. The Ainu leaders of the

coverage and the support of some Parliamentar¬

Ishikari region have maintained a fiercely

ians encouraged the central government to

independent attitude that can be traced back

consider the matter. Arai visited Tokyo again in

through resistance in the 1860s to relocation

November. In March 1934 the Act for the

to coastal fishing stations to the refusal to

Disposal of the Former Native Reservation in

participate in Shakushain's War of 1669. The

Asahikawa City was enacted, but this legislation

twentieth century dawned in Chikabumi with

was even less generous than the Protection Act

a land dispute that politicized the community

had been. Arai and his small group continued to

and provided it with an agenda often at odds

meet in Chikabumi but were suspected of being

with other organized Ainu movements.

aka ("Reds"), and they were kept under surveil¬

The Ishikari Ainu had been moved to a

110

lance by the community agricultural instaictor,

reservation at Chikabumi in 1890, but with

an ex-policeman who acted as an informer (Arai

heavy Wajin (Japanese) immigration and the

1984). As Bikky Sunazawa later recalled (1988),

arrival of the Imperial Army's 7th Division

even to sing the "Internationale" after a few

their lands were wanted by the Okuragumi, a

drinks was risky, and his mother sometimes had

large firm contracting with the military, and

to smother her husband Ichitaro with bedding

HISTORIC PERIOD/ R. SIDDLE

to prevent his being overheard. Arai, a

the authorities, some Ainu ran in elections

skilled hunter, was later conscripted and sent to

for Parliament, the Hokkaido Assembly, or

China, where he survived dangerous missions as

the governorship of Hokkaido. Makoto

a scout, a duty imposed as punishment for

Takahashi of Kushiro set up a small newslet¬

letting a Chinese POW escape execution

ter, the Ainu Shinbum, that occasionally

(Hokkaido Shinbum, 14 January 1989). The

angered the Ainu elites by reporting on Ainu

Chikabumi Ainu had been defeated once again

issues from a radical political perspective. In

by the power of the state, but their independent

February 1946 Ainu met in Shizunai to

attitude and opposition to the Protection Act

reform the Ainu Kyokai.

would emerge once more as a major force in the

It soon became clear that little had
changed for the Ainu in the new Japan. Despite

new Ainu movements of the 1970s.

lobbying by the Ainu Kyokai and a direct

Karafuto

petition to General Douglas MacArthur, the

There was one other group of Ainu even more

Ainu lost heavily in the Occupation's land

disadvantaged than most in that they were

reform. Classed as absentee landlords, 1,271

not Japanese citizens: the Ainu of Karafuto

Ainu lost their holdings. Japanese scholars of

(southern Sakhalin), who were not descended

the Ainu resumed their business from within

from those relocated to Hokkaido after the

the structures of institutional power, despite the

1875 treaty. Despite their segregation into

presence at Hokkaido University of the Ainu

"native villages," a handful of educated

scholar, Mashiho Chiri, who produced

Karafuto Ainu made efforts to improve educa¬

ethnographic studies and a noted dictionary on

tion and living standards, and there was also a

his way to becoming a full professor.

movement for granting citizenship to all Ainu

Sakuzaemon Kodama of the Faculty of

and transfering state-controlled fishing

Medicine, for instance, resumed his quest for

grounds to Ainu ownership. Saburo

Ainu bones after the war. In one incident in the

Kawamura, a young Ainu from Tarandomari,

1950s a university team enlisted the help of

was inspired by the actions of the Chikabumi

local authorities and police to excavate an Ainu

Ainu to petition the Karafuto colonial govern¬

cemetery against the opposition of the Ainu

ment and also travel to Tokyo to petition the

villagers (Siddle 1993). Chiri, a man as

central authorities on these issues.

argumentative and difficult as he was brilliant,

Citizenship was finally granted to the

was unable to get along with such men, and

Karafuto Ainu on January 1, 1933,• it did not

eventually quarrelled with most of the famous

mean equality, however, and the Karafuto

"Ainu scholars."

government continued to manage native fishing
grounds. The other indigenous peoples of

Ainu continued to be identified on the
basis of blood. In the words of one Ainu,

Sakhalin, confined to a settlement near Shikuka

"however much you mix blood, if you have

since 1926, were not considered for citizenship,

just a fraction of Ainu blood you are Ainu”

which had tragic consequences for some Ul'ta

(Gonai and Wakabayashi 1972: 201). Such

men who later served in the Japanese Special

categorization was, of course, not neutral but

one of the most important Ainu

Forces on the border with Russian Sakhalin.

was accompanied by the negative stereo¬

activists from the 1920s until his

Treated as spies by the Russians in 1945, they

types of popular social Darwinism (Siddle

death. He became increasingly vocal

were given long sentences in Siberian labor

1996). Given the difficulty of escaping such

camps. Some survivors eventually found their

categorization, Ainu were forced to hide their

World War II. A traditionalist caught

way to Japan, where the government refused to

ancestry or flee their local communities for the

in the political and cultural upheavals

pay them any pension or recognize their

day-labor markets of Japans rapidly growing

of the period, he greatly influenced

wartime service. As for the Karafuto Ainu

cities. Others found work in tourism. Although

themselves, their newly obtained citizenship

some, like Shigeru Kayano, saw tourism as an

carving by his youngest son Kazuo

ensured that only twelve years later they would,

opportunity to educate ignorant Wajin, most

captures some of the wisdom of this

as Japanese, have to leave their homeland on

found it a degrading experience (Kayano

Ainu statesman.

Sakhalin forever (fig. 14.4).

14.3 Portrait of Ichitaro Sunazawa
Ichitaro Sunazawa (1893-1953) was

in his anti-war sentiments after one
of his sons was drafted to serve in

his sons Bikky and Kazuo to become
artists and political activists. This

1994,- Sugawara 1968). Meanwhile, the Ainu
Kyokai attracted little support from poor

Occupation and Land Reform

Ainu who were suspicious of the motives of

The defeat of Imperial Japan in 1945 and the

the conservative leaders and were attempting

new atmosphere of democratization under the

to divest themselves of any Ainu identity.

Occupation seemed to herald a new dawn for

Renamed the Utari Kyokai in 1961, the

Ainu activism. Encouraged by the tolerance of

Association was, however, instrumental in

I 4 / A I N U RES I STAN CE S I N CE

1869

111

persuading the Hokkaido government to

poor" (Cornell 1964). The new pride and

improve housing and other facilities in poor

emphasis on Ainu identity served to create a

Ainu communities in the 1960s.

sense of community that could overcome the
often wide divisions of class, gender, or
generation in Ainu villages. As an assertion of

From Welfare Politics

policies that aimed at the eventual extinction

The agenda of such Ainu groups as the Kyokai,

of the "Ainu problem" through complete

which only served to reinforce majority

absorption of all Ainu into majority society.

perceptions of a subordinated and marginalized

Through identification with indigenous

people attempting to hasten their own extinc¬

movements in other states, the new Ainu

tion, began to change in the final years of the

movement attempted to redefine the relation¬

1960s as new groups of young Ainu activists

ship of the Ainu to the state in terms of a

emerged who were sharply critical of the Ainu

culturally and historically unique group with

establishment and its links with the authorities

distinct rights. The Ainu, as an indigenous

(fig. 14.1). Many of these young men and

people, were not just another disadvantaged

women had moved to the cities and took their

social group in need of state welfare but a

inspiration and tactics not from their rural

"nation" desirous of decolonization.

elders but from such radical elements in

T

New political trends first began to

Japanese society as the Burakumin, an outcast

appear around 1968, with the celebration of

"untouchable" class that allied with revolution-

the centennial of the "history" of Hokkaido.

ir^--n*

ill mm

3

14.4

difference it challenged the assimilation

to Indigenous Rights

Sakhalin Ainu

in Isuishikari, Hokkaido

Sakhalin Ainu, even more than the
Kurile Ainu, suffered from territorial
disputes between Russia and Japan.
Nearly 1,000 Sakhalin Ainu were forc¬
ibly resettled at Tsuishikari, swampy
land near Sapporo, when Russia took

JliaiHBVI

S al nvnfcvK

*1 fr'
it

*

ary students and anti-Vietnam war activists.

Considerable sums were spent on public

The new Ainu activists were leftist, and their

celebrations, yet the Ainu were ignored. In

early writings and policies were permeated

official and popular imagination the story of

with references to class struggle and revolu¬

Hokkaido was a heroic struggle against Nature

tion. These ideas were soon joined by a far

as pioneers brought the beneficial effects of

more radical development in the history of

"progress" to a "natural" extension of Japanese

Ainu resistance—a new emphasis on Ainu

territory. Protesting this denial of their

vors returned to Sakhalin after the

identity. In a reversal of the flight of Ainu

existence, one young Ainu from Kushiro

1905 Russo-Japanese war, only to be

youth from Ainu identity, these young men

called for Wajin not to forget that the ground

expelled and resettled again in Hok¬

and women rejected assimilation and actively

under the new commemorative tower was

undertook a search for their roots.

"soaked with Ainu blood" (HokMido Shinbum,

possession of Sakhalin in 1875. Survi¬

kaido in 1945. This photograph, taken
by Benjamin Smith Lyman, shows
Sakhalin refugees at a Tsuishikari netmaking factory in 1876. (UML)

The "Amu problem" was redefined It
was no longer a case of cultural extinction or
administering social welfare to the "frontier

HISTORIC PERIOD / R SIDDLE

I 3 May 1968, evening edition).
Debate was also stimulated among Ainu
by a government proposal in June 1968 to

revise the Protection Act and a unanimous

provided news and analysis of the Ainu

vote by the mayors of Hokkaido for its

struggle and contributed to the search for

abolition in June 1970. The Lltari Kyokai

Ainu roots by seeking out elders and

overwhelmingly favored the continued

publishing lengthy interviews with them.

existence of the Protection Act on the

There was often little unity among and

grounds that it could be used as a convenient

between various groups, however, and these

umbrella to enact special welfare policies, as it

divisions were reflected in a variety of

had in the early 1960s. This stance annoyed

political ideologies.

many Ainu, especially in Chikabumi, who saw

In late 1972 tensions were heightened

the Protection Act as the institutional

dramatically by a violent terrorist campaign

expression of discrimination and inferiority.

carried out in the name of Ainu liberation.

The Asahikawa Ainu were further irritated in

On January 21, 1973, 150 Ainu gathered in

August 1970 when the city celebrated eighty

Sapporo for the Zenkoku Ainu no Kataru Kai

years since foundation with a statue depicting

(National Ainu Discussion Meeting) orga¬

four young Wajin colonizers surrounding an

nized by Bikky Sunazawa and younger Ainu

elderly Ainu. Bikky Sunazawa handed out

but open to all. Conservative leaders and

leaflets during the inauguration ceremonies to

those engaged in tourism were suspicious of

protest this symbolization of Ainu subordina¬

the motives of the younger activists, who

tion (Sala 1975). Sunazawa was himself on his

insisted, for their part, that it was a "people's

way to becoming a sculptor and artist of some

meeting" to discuss issues faced by all Ainu

repute. Although he rejected being labeled an

(Sala 1975). National attention remained
focused on the "Ainu problem" as terrorist
outrages continued, culminating in the
bombing of the Hokkaido Government
Building on March 2, 1976, in which two
people were killed and more than ninety
injured. Despite intensive surveillance and
harassment, the police were unable to prove
Ainu involvement, and the bombings proved
instead to be the work of a small cell of
radical Wajin terrorists who were later
sentenced to death (Chikap 1989). Although
Ainu leaders condemned the terrorists, these
incidents contributed to the increasing
politicization of Ainu communities as the
issues that underlay continued Ainu
marginalization became difficult to ignore.
Some Ainu groups, such as Shoji Yuki's
Ainu Kaiho Domei (Ainu Liberation League),
adopted forceful tactics of confrontation and

14.5

Ainu Organizational

Meeting, 1973

Escalation of rhetoric and campaigns
of political violence in support of
Ainu liberation led to a meeting in

"Ainu artist," his pride in his heritage was not

denunciation, particularly against the activi¬

only a crucial element in his art but also

ties of academics, forcing public apologies on

underlay his activism (fig. 14.5).

several occasions (Siddle 1993). Protests

Such developments stimulated the

were also made against tourist organizations

Sapporo on January 21, 1973, which

formation of activist organizations, and many

and media companies that conveyed dis¬

was attended by 150 Ainu. Although

small groups emerged, often with overlap¬

criminatory stereotypes of the Ainu. Some

the meeting was opposed by conser¬

ping membership. Urban Ainu also moved to

television broadcasts were canceled, apologies

find a place within the Utari Kyokai, from

were screened, and offending publications

the Ainu movement and set a new

which they had been largely excluded. The

were recalled. Courtrooms also became the

course for political action.

voice of this movement was a bimonthly

scene of confrontation between Ainu activists

newspaper, Anutari Ainu (We human beings),

and the state. Some criminal cases involving

which began publishing in 1973. The first

Ainu defendants, for instance, were politi¬

issue reported in detail on the struggle of

cized and turned into showcases revealing

Ainu fisherman in the village of Usu against

the discrimination faced by the Ainu, thus

construction of a thermal power station.

generating publicity for the cause.

vative Ainu leaders and those en¬
gaged in tourism, it helped solidify

During its three-year existence, Anutari Ainu

14/AINU RESISTANCE SINCE

1869

Within a few short years, Ainu politics

14.8

Ainu Flag

As a young artist and political activist

had undergone a dramatic transformation.

The state's response was to attempt to

The Utari Kyokai could not remain unaf¬

bring the "Ainu problem" back within the

Bikky Sunazawa designed the Ainu

fected as the authority and assimilationist

confines of welfare policy. In August 1973 the

May Day parade in Sapporo. The em¬

orientation of the more elderly and conserva¬

authorities drew up the Hokkaido Utari

blem consists of a red arrowhead (ay)

tive leaders were directly threatened. The

Welfare Countermeasures, a package of

Association had to accommodate some of the

welfare measures and infrastructural projects

demands of the younger activists and moved

similar to the policies that had been proposed

flag, which first appeared in the 1973

whose color signifies aconite hunting
poison, while the white pattern signi¬
fies the snows of the Hokkaido winter.

to distance itself from the state by transfer¬

to assimilate the outcast Burakumin minority

ring in May 1974 to an "independent" office,

within the larger Japanese society. The policy

but its close ties with the Hokkaido govern¬

was administered largely through the Utari

ment continued through annual subsidies and

Kyokai, and the membership and influence of

staff interchanges. On the other hand, the

the Association began to revive. For the state,

Utari Kyokai was well placed to act as the

this welfare policy did not damage their

established institutional channel for Ainu

official stance that there are no minority

negotiation with the state when the "Ainu

populations in Japan—a view publicly aired

problem"—and the interest in it by opposi¬

by the government in its first report to the

tion political parties—became too much for

United Nations after ratification of the

the authorities to ignore.

International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights in 1979.
The genie of Ainu nationhood, how¬
ever, could not now be stuffed back into the
bottle. Although some conservative elders
still favored assimilation, for most activists the
political struggle was now informed by a
sense of identity and pride in being Ainu. The
cultural manifestations of Ainu-ness—
embroidered traditional costumes, prayers in
the Ainu language, oral literature, dance—
became increasingly in evidence at Ainu
events, and festivals and ceremonies, such as
those enacted each year before the new statue
of Shakushain in Shizunai, became occasions
to celebrate this heritage and link the present
struggle to the feats of past heroes. Although
much of the expertise in traditional culture
came from elders in rural or tourist communi¬
ties, the initiative for these events often came
from the politically active, younger, urban
Ainu Such occasions, reflected leading
activist Tokuhei Narita, "lit the lamp of the
solidarity that the Utari have long lost”
(Narita 1972: 38-39). New symbols rein¬
forced the sense of the Ainu as a nation: an
Ainu flag, designed by Bikky Sunazawa, first
appeared at the 1973 May Day parade in
Sapporo (fig. 14.6), and there was a strong
identification with Aim mosir, the homeland.
Ainu nationhood was greatly stimulated
by contacts with indigenous peoples in other
countries. Yoshimi Hiramura, the young
founder of the Ainu newspaper Anutari Ainu,
consciously identified with Native Americans
after a trip to the United States in 1972, and
the first issue of the paper devoted a page to
the confrontation at Wounded Knee between
activists of the American Indian Movement and

U4

HISTORIC PERIOD/ R S1DDLE

federal authorities. Ainu began to travel and

by the Japanese authorities, forced the return

actively seek out other native peoples, from

of remains looted by British officials of the

China to Alaska. In May 198 1 Tokuhei Narita

Hakodate Consulate (Siddle 1993). Another

became the first Ainu to attend the World

incident of protest resulted from the excava¬

Conference of Indigenous Peoples when he

tion of Kurile Ainu graves on Shumushu

traveled to the third meeting in Canberra,

Island by anatomist Sakuzaemon Kodama in

Australia. Not only were political strategies

July 1937. On reading of this in a newspaper,

borrowed as a result of such interaction but

the leader of the surviving Kurile Ainu on

also the symbols of a common underlying

Shikotan demanded that Kodama return the

aborigi-nality: "We all have things in common,

bones because they were the remains of their

on the level of feelings too," commented

ancestors, but he was eventually persuaded

Narita on his return (Egami 1982: 304).

to donate them to Kodama's laboratory after

By the early 1980s, such awareness of

a memorial service was held in the Sapporo

nationhood resulted in a stronger, though still

Orthodox church. Memorial services were

troubled, sense of unity among Ainu groups.

held annually for three years and Kodama

This was reflected in a new item on the

erected a memorial stone at the cemetery on

political agenda around which Ainu of most

Shikotan (S. Kodama 1971).

persuasions were able to rally. In May 1984

Since 1987 Ainu representatives have

the Utari Kyokai, recognizing that welfare

been attending the United Nations Working

benefits were no longer sufficient currency for

Group on Indigenous Populations, and Ainu

the Ainu-Japanese relationship, adopted a

participated in many activities at home and

proposal for a New Law for the Ainu People

abroad during the United Nations Interna¬

to replace the 1899 Protection Act. Neverthe¬

tional Year of the World's Indigenous People

less, the actual draft of the New Law retained

in 1993. In 1994 Shigeru Kayano became the

a distinct welfare orientation, reflecting the

first Ainu politician at the national level,

assimilationist feelings still held by many

entering Japan's parliament after the death of

ordinary Utari Kyokai members who sought

an incumbent member. Kayano was also

improved access to education and wealth in

involved in the bitter opposition to the

majority society. Although it made strong

construction of a dam in his home village of

demands for respect and support for Ainu culture

Nibutani. Although the dispute polarized the

and human rights, this proposal for a New

community, the Sapporo District Court ruled

Law lacked a clear formulation of indigenous

in March 1997 that the government was at

rights. There was no mention, for instance, of

fault for not taking Ainu concerns over

the right to self-determination or land rights.

ancestral sites into consideration (Sonohara

This weakness has become increasingly obvious

1997). The ruling was also a landmark

in recent years as Ainu activists have come to

decision in that the Ainu were recognized for

participate fully in the international gather¬

the first time by the judiciary as senju minzoku,

ings of indigenous peoples, where land rights

an "indigenous people." On July 1, 1997, the

have had prominent focus.

Protection Act was finally repealed and

The late 1980s and 1990s saw a further

replaced with the Ainu Shinpo, a cultural
promotion law. Not all Ainu are satisfied,

strengthening of Ainu identity and
ethnopolitics. Notable victories included the

however, because there is no mention in this

court action brought against noted scholars

legislation of indigenous rights, political

by Mieko Chikap in 1986 over violation of

representation, or other legal guarantees.

portrait rights involving the publication of

The Ainu struggle for full recognition

personal images. Action was also taken

as an indigenous people seems set to

against Hokkaido LIniversity over the Ainu

continue, and days when Ainu leaders argued

remains held there, and in 1984 the university

for assimilation are long gone. Perhaps

agreed to return some remains and hold an

Tokuhei Narita best sums up contemporary

annual Ainu memorial service for the rest.

Ainu resistance: "[We] are now editing our

This was not the first time that the desecra¬

history, claiming our rights, understanding

tion of ancestral gravesites aroused fierce

our identity, beginning to walk for ourselves"

resistance. In 1867 Ainu protests, supported

(Narita 1984: 138).

14 /AINU RESISTANCE SINCE

1869

115

P

ERCEIVED SIMILARITIES AND A BROAD

Ainu and
Northwest
Coast Peoples:
A Comparison
Motomichi Kono
and William W. Fitzhugh

programs related to the Crossroads of Continents

sense of understanding between the

exhibition (see introduction, this volume) and

native peoples who occupy the

at a centennial conference on the Jesup project,

southern coasts of the North Pacific

Constructing Cultures Then and Now, held in 1997

in Asia and North America—which derive

at the American Museum of Natural Fdistory

from recent cultural exchanges between Ainu

(Kendall forthcoming).

artists and cultural leaders and their counter¬

Although the Ainu were initially

parts among Northwest Coast Indian groups

included in Boas's research agenda, his plans

—have aroused interest in the question of

failed to materialize. The absence of an Ainu

whether these groups had cultural contacts or

study in the multivolume series on the Jesup

other relationships in the past. Curiosity

Expedition that Boas compiled gave the

about Asian-American links arose as soon as

impression that the Ainu were not among the

Europeans began exploring these regions in

family of North Pacific cultures. Research

the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries

since then demonstrates quite the opposite:

(Golder 1914). Early explorers like Stepan

similarities in subsistence practices, clothing,

Krasheninnikov, who investigated the

technology, shamanism, ceremonial life, art,

Kamchatka peninsula in 1735-41, and

and folklore suggest that the Ainu (and

naturalist Georg Wilhelm Steller, who

probably the prehistoric Jomon and Okhotsk

described the Pacific coast of Alaska and the

cultures as well) share a common history with

Aleutians in 1741, were surprised to discover

cold water-adapted cultures of the North

cultural parallels—notable in customs,

Pacific rim. These ties were strongest with
peoples of Sakhalin and the lower Amur with

15.1 Ainu Totem Pole
Ainu tourist centers began displaying
carved poles resembling “cigar-store”
Indians and small versions of North¬
west Coast Indian totem poles soon
after the end of World War II. These
poles were carved with Ainu motifs and
often had an owl, the Ainu god of the
village, on top. Later these owls began
to be carved with outstretched wings—
as on this pole photographed in
Otoineppu in 1998—making them
resemble Northwest Coast Indian
‘'thunderbirds." Ainu artists have
adapted the totem-pole concept into a
unique form of modern Ainu art.

whom the Ainu had extensive contacts during
the past several thousand years (Yamaura and
Ushiro, S. Sasaki, T. Kikuchi, this volume),
but to a lesser degree there are parallels with
more distant peoples of the Bering Sea and
the Northwest Coast as far south as the
Columbia River. Some parallel traditions, like
basketry (Graburn and Lee, this volume), may
have evolved as recently as the European
exploration period, while other features (firstsalmon and bear ceremonialism, sea mammal¬
hunting technology, and spiritually based art)
may have spread with the first Asians who
moved into the New World at the end of the
Paleolithic period 10,000 to 20,000 years ago.

Historical Contacts: Drift Vessels
This paper compares Ainu and southern
Northwest Coast cultures in terms of geogra¬
phy, general cultural categories, and recent
history. History and archaeology both indi¬
cate that contacts between Japan and the
Northwest Coast have occurred. Evidence of

i 16

language, and folklore—between Asian and

prehistoric contact with Japan in the form of

American peoples living thousands of miles

glass fishnet floats and iron tools of Japanese

apart on either side of Bering Strait. Anthro¬

origin has been found at the fifteenth-century

pological studies did not begin until 1897

Ozette archaeological site located on the

when Franz Boas launched the Jesup North

Olympic Peninsula near the mouth of Puget

Pacific Expedition (1897-1902) to investigate

Sound (Daugherty and Friedman 1983). It is

and compare the cultures and history across

believed that these materials came from

this vast region (Boas 1903, 1905). The

fishing vessels that were periodically disabled

results of these expeditions and subsequent

by storms off the eastern coast of Japan and

twentieth-century research on Asian-American

drifted with their crews across the North

relationships were reviewed in various

Pacific following prevailing currents and wind

HISTORIC PERIOD / M. KONO AND W. FITZHUGH

until they reached the shores of northwestern

resources. Although the first known contact

North America. Historical records of vessel

between Ainu and native peoples of the

losses in eastern Japan and eighteenth- and

Americas began when an Ainu group was

nineteenth-century reports of drift vessels and

invited to perform at the Louisiana Purchase

wreckage finds on the Northwest Coast

Exposition in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1904

(Brooks 1876; Quimby 1985) suggest that

(Starr 1904, VanStone 1993,- Kotani, this

hundreds of such voyages must have occurred

volume), it was not until the 1970s that direct

between A.D. 1400 and 1800 before Japanese

and continuing exchanges between Ainu and

ship technology improved, making such

native peoples of the Northwest Coast were

accidents less common. Although no vessels

initiated. Since then, Ainu and Northwest

are known to have reached America with live

Coast artists including Bikky Sunazawa (see

crews, such a possibility exists, which would

Dubreuil, this volume), craftspeople, dancers,

have allowed for direct transfer of both

and cultural leaders have participated in many

Japanese and Ainu material culture as well as

cultural exchange programs. These interac¬

socio-cultural concepts to northwestern North

tions have resulted in educational and research

America native peoples long before the arrival

opportunities in science, arts, humanities, law,

of Europeans. Such a mechanism would not

museology, and library and native studies.

require contacts or diffusion through geo¬

They have increased cultural awareness of the

graphically intermediate groups around the

other group among both populations, and

North Pacific rim.
The appearance of Asian drift vessels has
been most frequently reported in western

native participants discovered common bonds
in their shared experiences of cultural,
political, and economic repression. Finally,

Vancouver Island and the coast between Puget

these contacts produced a cross-fertilization of

Sound and the Columbia River delta. The

contemporary native art, dance, and music

recent reevaluation of the importance of

traditions. One of the more surprising

maritime transport and trade in Ainu culture

testimonials to cross-cultural communication

and the routine Ainu nagivation that existed

(from the perspective of a North American

between Hokkaido and Kamchatka makes it

visitor) is the twentieth-century adoption of a

seem possible that not only Japanese, but Ainu

foreign art form, the Northwest Coast-style

as well may have been unwitting participants in

totem pole, which are found at many Ainu

this intercontinental exchange. Although

museums and tourist centers in Hokkaido

previous literature has emphasized the source

(see Dubreuil, this volume).

of drift vessels as Japanese, it seems likely that
Ainu vessels and crews also occasionally took

Geography and Natural Resources

part in accidental drift voyages, and because

Although the Ainu and Northwest Coast

the distance would have been shorter for them,

peoples were located at the opposite ends

the chance of survival of Ainu crews would

of the North Pacific geographic con¬

have been greater than for Japanese.
Despite such intriguing evidence for
Asian-Northwest Coast contacts, our primary

tinuum, these cultures adapted to similar
climatic and coastal regimes and used
similar biotic resources. Greater environ¬

intent here is to establish a framework for

mental and cultural homogeneity exists

understanding relationships between Ainu and

within the greater North Pacific region

Northwest Coast peoples. Whether future

from Hokkaido to the Columbia River than

historical, anthropological, and archaeological

within the Asian or American coastal

studies corroborate the evidence of earlier

regions themselves (Boas 1905,- Kroeber

contacts or not, Ainu today have developed a

1939,- Suttles 1990a). Although each

modern kinship with Northwest Coast peoples

culture anchors the ends of their respective

and seem to acknowledge a mutual cultural

distributions, their latitudes do not exactly

attraction or magnetism (Chisato Dubreuil,

correspond: the greatest extent of Ainu

personal communication).

territory in the early nineteenth century

The recent history of Ainu contacts with
North Americans began after the Meiji

fell between latitude 41° to 55° north, from
southern Hokkaido to the northern

Restoration in 1868 when Japan invited U S.

Kuriles, whereas the Northwest Coast

government officials, technicians, scientists,

region extends from 45° to 60° north, from

and university professors to help modernize

the Columbia River to Cook Inlet, Alaska.

the country and develop Hokkaido's natural

This is one reason for the many geographi-

15/AINU AND THE NORTHWEST COAST

117

cal differences within each region, as well as

It is not surprising that in adapting to similar

for the extremely oceanic environment of the

environments and resources each group

Kurile Islands, other Ainu areas in Hokkaido

developed similar solutions that inform their

and Sakhalin have relatively harsh winters

cultural complexes, such as their extensive

with deep falls of snow due to the influence

wood-working, grass and fiber use, and

of cold Siberian air masses and predomi¬

fishing technologies. Some cultural elements,

nantly open seas,- much of the coast of

like the toggling harpoons used by the Ainu

Sakhalin is frozen in winter, and pack ice

and Eskimo peoples, while stylistically

reaches northern Hokkaido (Nakano and

different, must have a common ancestry in

Kobayashi 1 967,-Ohnuki-Tierney 1976a,•

North Pacific marine mammal-hunting

Ono and Igarashi 1992,- see also Ono,

technology. Similarities between Ainu and

Watanabe, Olschleger, this volume). In

Amur River garment patterns and decorative

southern Hokkaido and northern Honshu

arts are more difficult to assess but might be

ocean and terrestrial conditions are much

explained by mutual influence between

more temperate. By contrast, the Northwest

peoples who have had contact for centuries or

Coast receives little snow at sea level,- its

may simply be derived from a deep pool of

coastal waters are completely ice-free,- and

ancient beliefs and religious concepts shared

its vegetation patterns (temperate to

by early northeast Asian cultures. Similarities

subarctic rain forests at sea level) are

between these East Asian design styles and

dominated by altitude more than by latitude

those found in prehistoric Bering Sea Eskimo

(Suttles 1990b). Summer climates in both

and Aleut ivory carvings and body art seen on

regions are more similar,- the northeastern

ivory figurines and human mummies (Fitzhugh

coast of Hokkaido lacks the oaks and

1988) and with Northwest Coast (especially

beech that are present in the broadleaf

Tlingit) art suggest that the Ainu also have an

forests of southern Hokkaido, again because

as-yet unspecified share in these deeply

of altitude and the influence of cold

rooted North Pacific artistic traditions and

maritime waters. Both peoples occupy

beliefs. Other similarities—for instance, those

islands and cold-water coasts that require

seen in tubular needlecases with whale-tail

extensive inshore and open-ocean travel and

ornaments among the Kurile Ainu—suggest

utilization of maritime, riverine, and

derivation from Okhotsk culture or contacts

terrestrial resources.

with Eskimo groups in the Bering Sea.

The natural resources of both areas also

118

Bear and First-Salmon Ritual

the many differences among them. Except

Religion and ceremonial life are often

display both similarities and differences. Both

thought to be more significant indicators of

have the same or similar species of land game,

cultural relationship than material culture

including moose, bear, deer, wolves, foxes, and

because they are less likely to result from

a variety of smaller fur-bearers. There are also

environmental influence, casual trade, or

differences, however: elk, mountain goat, and

independent invention. In this regard, the Ainu

mountain sheep, present on the Northwest

bear and first-salmon ceremonies may provide

Coast, are absent in the Ainu area, whereas the

stronger evidence of shared heritage between

latter has several mammals absent from the

Ainu and other circumpolar peoples (Hallowell

Northwest Coast, including reindeer (present

1926). Like the Ainu, most circumpolar

only in Sakhalin) and the raccoon dog. Many

cultures honor the bear as the chief deity of

marine mammals, including seals, sea lions,

the gods of land and pay it respect by offering

porpoises, orcas, and whales, are found in both

elaborate rituals in its honor when it is killed.

areas, as are many species of ocean fish, of

The Ainu iyomante practice involves capturing

which halibut and salmon were most important

and rearing a cub for a year or more before

for both groups,- trout and swordfish were

killing it and sending its spirit with human gifts

important resources in Hokkaido, but these

of inaw and sake off to the god world in an

were less important or absent (in the case of

elaborate ceremony,- this process not only

swordfish) on the Northwest Coast (Nakano

demonstrates human respect for knmity (gods),

and Kobayashi 1967,- Suttles 1990a, b). Salmon

but the offerings petition the gods to return to

was the most important food for most groups

visit humans on earth again in the future

in both areas because of its relatively predict¬

(Watanabe 1972: 71-73,-Akino, Utagawa, this

able arrival, its abundance, and its capacity to

volume). There is little doubt about Ainu

be preserved for later consumption.

connections with Aruur-area Siberian bear

HISTORIC PERIOD/ M.

KONO AND W.

FITZHUGH

rituals (Black 1973,- Ikeya 1997), and some

west Coast), and at the conclusion of the

believe its appearance in Ainu culture origi¬

ceremony both groups return the remains (the

nated from the intrusion of Siberian-oriented

mandible, in the case of the Ainu) to the river.

Okhotsk culture into Hokkaido (Utagawa

Although other details of these rituals (such as

1989). Northwest Coast bear ceremonies take

the manner of cutting and dressing, use of

different forms but have a similar purpose and

inaw sticks, and absence of bear and shamanis-

have strong ritual linkages to shamanism and

tic elements in the Ainu salmon ritual) differ,

salmon ceremonialism (Boas 1894: 92-101),-

these ceremonies seem to be variations on a

rock art at Kitselas Canyon on the Skeena

common theme. Unfortunately, prehistoric

River in British Columbia that illustrates

evidence of salmon ritual, which is common

shaman spirits communicating with bear spirits

in British Columbia, is rarely found in

at a major salmon-fishing location appears to

northeastern Asia, although it has been

illuminate this mythology and the importance

suggested at the lowest levels (Level VI1,

of ritual concerning the replenishment of this

14,000 B.C.) at the LIshki site in Kamchatka

crucial human resource (MacDonald 1983:

(Dikov 1968).

1 18; Crowell 1988: 140).
A comparison of first-salmon ceremonies
conducted by Ainu and peoples of the North¬

Similarities in ritual associated with
whaling as well as in technology and hunting
practices among Indians of the Vancouver

west Coast reveals more specilic parallels than

Island and Olympic Peninsula region,

do bear rituals. Like Northwest Coast peoples,

Alaskan Aleut and Eskimo groups, and

Ainu believe the salmon is a messenger of the

Northeastern Siberians also exist (Lantis
1938,- Rousselot, Fitzhugh, and Crowell
1988). Ainu whaling, which ceased to be
practiced before the era of ethnographic
reporting, was inherited from earlier Jomon
and Okhotsk predecessors and involved the
taking of both large and small whales
(Iwasaki-Goodman and Nomoto, this
volume). Lack of information precludes
direct comparisons with other whaling
traditions, but Ainu oral history suggests that
it followed the general North Pacific pattern.
To date none of these important ritual
systems (bear, salmon, whale) have been
explored in depth, so it would be premature
at present to do more than point out
congruences and possible historical affinities.

Comparative History:
Diversity and Assimilation
Cultural geography is one area where Ainu
and Northwest Coast peoples display great
differences, for although each occupies
15.2

Named Ainu Groups

gods. The first salmon to appear in the streams

relatively similar maritime coastal regions,

in Hokkaido

This map shows the location of

each year is caught and killed with a special,

the Ainu today display more linguistic and

named Hokkaido Ainu groups

ritually decorated club (Watanabe 1972: 73-

cultural cohesion, even considering strong

from information recorded on

77,- Roche and Hutchinson 1998: 127-29,-

regional subdivisions (see below and

Ono, Olschleger, this volume). In both

Ohnuki-Tterney references), than do

Ainu grave markers.

regions, the first and sometimes the last salmon

Northwest Coast groups over a region of

(and occasionally other important fish) are

comparable geographic size. The Ainu of

given ritual sending ceremonies to return them

Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the Kuriles spoke

to the god world bearing evidence of human

dialects of a single language family and

respect and gratitude for the yearly renewal of

shared many aspects of a common culture,

this resource. The fish is shared with the

by contrast, the Northwest Coast culture

community and is ritually dressed (in inaw-kike

region has seven different language families

among the Ainu,- in cedar bark on the North¬

and an equal or greater number of divergent

15 /AINU

AND THE NORTHWEST COAST

119

cultural complexes (Krauss 1988,- Suttles

coasts of Sakhalin had two groups who called

1990a). The reasons for these differences

themselves Enchiw,- outsiders called them the

between the Ainu and peoples of the North¬

Karafuto (Sakhalin) Ainu, and some of these

west Coast can probably be attributed to

people also lived in northern Hokkaido.

geography, culture history, and politics.

These differences suggest that there never
was a single homogeneous Ainu culture or

The Ainu appear to have been at least
partially unified by descent from a northern

language and that the Ainu region was

Jomon cultural tradition that was somewhat

occupied by a variety of local and regional

isolated from other centers of cultural develop¬

groups that had their own distinctive features,-

ment in southern Japan, Korea, and the lower

it is therefore hardly appropriate to subsume

Amur. More recently, southern Hokkaido was

them all under the term "the Ainu people."

occupied by Satsumon culture, whereas

Restricting our comparison more

northern Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the Kuriles

specifically to Vancouver Island as a subre¬

were transformed by a Siberian-derived

gion of the Northwest Coast, several groups

Okhotsk culture (a.D. 500-1000), which

or bands may be identified, all of which

intruded during the late Jomon from the north,

continue to be known today by their self-

endowing a northern cultural stamp to these

described native names: the Kwakwaka wakw

northern Ainu regions. With the decline of the

in the northern part of the island (known as

Okhotsk culture, a resurgent Satsumon culture,

Kwakuitl in southern regions),- Nuu-chah-

fueled by contacts with the rapidly expanding,

nuth, Dididaht, and Pacheenaht (Vancouver

agriculturally based Japanese state, intruded

"Nootka") on the west coast,- Halkomelem

from the south, forming the basis for historic

(Coast Salish) on the southeast end of the

Ainu culture. Satsumon expansion probably

island,- and many other groups in southwest¬

provided a unifying force for the development

ern Vancouver Island (Suttles 1990a).

of historic-period Ainu culture after A.D. 1400.

Hokkaido and in the Kurile Islands disappeared

position taken by the Ainu in the northern

when names used by Wajin (the ruling Japa¬

maritime trade that developed between Japan

nese) and Russians were given priority. Only the

and Asia. Thus, Japanese encroachment during

Enchiw of Sakhalin kept their own name, until

the past thousand years into Ainu territories in

the 1930s when they came to be known as the

northern Japan—and more recently into

Karafuto Ainu after they were incorporated into

Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the Kuriles—as well

modern Japanese society. Wajin called the Ainu

as nineteenth- and twentieth-century Russian

of Sakhalin, Kuriles, and Hokkaido collectively

incursions into the Kuriles and Sakhalin and

"Ezo," and by so doing they ignored the reality

recent Japanese policies of assimilation forced

of the constituent social groups. Later, the

a reduction in regional cultural diversity and

collective term "Ainu," which referred to the

contributed to a more cohesive Ainu identity

three regional groups in Ainu language, replaced

today than existed in the past.

"Ezo" when the Ainu were officially adopted

Th is diverse cultural and geographic

into the Japanese state,- nevertheless, in official
circles, following a decree of 1899, Ainu were

environment was the theater for the forma¬
tion of various ancient Ainu ethnic groups

called simply "former aborigines." Only in the

which, despite the presence of a basic Ainu

Ainu Shinpo, a 1997 law, was the term "Ainu"

core, displayed many subregional and local

reinstated and given full governmental approval.

In Canada, on the other hand, even

differences. Until one hundred years ago

though the English collective term "First

traces of several ethnic groups remained on

no

Self-described names for Ainu groups on

Additional cohesion came from the central

the islands of Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the

Nations" has come to be widely used in recent

Kuriles. On Hokkaido there were the Shumu-

years (in the United States the corresponding

un-kuru, Sar-un-kuru, Menashikuru, Peni-un-

term "Native American" is employed), native

kuru, and various groups in the Tokachi and

groups are generally known by their self-

Kitami areas to the south (fig. 15.2). These

described names. Another difference between

were not self-described names but were the

the Ainu and the First Nations of Canada is

names they were given by others, primarily the

the frequent loss among the Ainu, due to

Japanese. The Menashikuru lived in the

relocation, schooling, and administrative

southernmost Kuriles,- the rest of the Kuriles

procedures, of their social lineage, which in

north to Kamchatka was occupied by the

Canada and the LInited States has been

Kurile (Chishima) Ainu. The east and west

retained despite changes in group affiliation

HISTORIC PERIOD/ M.

KONO AND W.

FITZHUCH

by individual bands and reservations. In most

not take place until 1828,- the first HBC post on

cases it is impossible for ethnic Ainu to live

Vancouver Island was established by James

today in their traditional social groupings, as

Douglas in 1849, and the colony joined the

many Canadian and American native groups

Canadian Federation as the Province of British

do. Thus, to a degree, native people in North

Columbia only in 1871. Similar late chronolo¬

America still maintain a separate ethnic and

gies of early European-native contacts are

social identity (with regard to the state national¬

found in other regions of the Northwest Coast

ity) that has been lost to most Japanese Ainu.

and Alaska.

The reasons for these differences may be
found in different political histories. Historically

The history of the Ainu and the First
Nations of Vancouver Island reveals that the

the Enchiw of Sakhalin were influenced by the

incorporation of native societies into modern

invasion of the Yuan military force, albeit briefly,

states occurred at about the same time,- the

in the latter part of the 1200s, whereas Russian

dates of subsequent settlement by large

contact with Ainu in central Hokkaido did not

numbers of non-native immigrants and their

begin until the mid-1700s. Meanwhile the Ainu

gradual dominance over native residents is also

in southern Hokkaido had been strongly

comparable. In other respects, however, the

influenced by the Wajin (proto-Japanese) in

history of the Ainu and the Wajin is quite

Honshu because trading bases were established in

different from that of native peoples and

northern Honshu in the mid-1400s. The finds of

Europeans on the Northwest Coast Unlike the

southern agricultural cultigens in Satsumon sites

latter, contact between the Ainu and the Wajin

in Hokkaido dating to the ninth century A.D.

extends back at least 2,000 years and intensi¬
fied in northern regions after A.D. 800. By the
sixteenth century the Ainu were involved in
major trading activities with Japan and the
Asian continent (Harrison 1954,- Howell 1994,

1995, and this volume,- S. Sasaki, this volume),
and by the mid-1600s these groups were
involved in significant intermarriage and racial
mixing. Wajin, Ainu, Sakhalin, and Amur River
peoples also shared many common cultural
elements—use of similar tools forms and
technologies, materials, and even similar
religious and ritual expressions (Obayashi

1997)—whereas Northwest Coast and
Europeans did not,- in these respects and many
others, the political history of Ainu and
Northwest Coast peoples and the states that
subsumed them are entirely different and have
produced different outcomes for their respec¬
tive indigenous peoples.
Ainu culture, especially in Hokkaido,
15.3

Skidegate Village

Although the Ainu were evicted from

(Crawford and Yoshizaki 1987,- Fitzhugh, this

began to become noticeably "Japanized"

volume) and the appearance of Japanese iron,

beginning in the thirteenth century, which is

lacquerware, and other southern trade goods in

when Ainu culture first became ethnically

early archaeological sites in Hokkaido indicate

identifiable. About this time, pithouses were

similarities have prompted the Ainu to

more than 1,000 years of contact, influence, and

replaced by above-ground houses more similar

seek contacts with native peoples of

acculturation between Ainu and Wajin peoples.

to Japanese housing styles of this period, iron

By contrast, contact between the first European

tools and pots began to be introduced by trade,

most of their coastal settlements by
Japanese, they have not entirely lost
coastal interests, and environmental

northwestern North America. Many
Ainu also see parallels in Native

explorers like Vitus Bering (1741), La Perouse

mainly with the Japanese. More extensive

This Haida village in the Queen Char¬

(1786), and James Cook (1778) in the northern

Japanese influence was felt in the mid¬

lotte Islands was photographed in

Northwest Coast, and by Esteban Jose Martinez

sixteenth century when trade with the Wajin

(1789) and other Spanish explorers in the

was formalized by the establishment of a

Vancouver Island region was extremely late.

network of trading posts in northern Honshu

American and Ainu political history.

1900 by John Swanton during the
Jesup North Pacific Expedition.
(AMNH 330387)

American traders reached the Columbia River

(Takakura I960,- I. Kikuchi, this volume). As a

only in 1811, but in Vancouver Island the first

consequence, Ainu began to have ready access

contacts with the Hudson's Bay Company did

to rice and other southern food products,-

15 / AINU AND THE NORTHWEST COAST

121

Hokkaido—that ornamented ceremonial
clothing, which were produced by applique
made with imported Japanese trade cotton and
Asian silk thread rather than native materials.
In this way, Ainu and Japanese culture
mutually influenced each other over a long
period of time. Corresponding Ainu influence
on Japanese culture, restricted largely to
northern Honshu, is seen primarily in placenames, language, and oral history (I. Kikuchi,
Tamura, this volume). Evidence for the direction
of borrowing, for instance, the use of wood
shavings for ritual purposes or certain orna¬
mental design motifs, is unclear. This history is
vastly different from that of native peoples and
Europeans in northwestern North America,
Europeans arrived there only 250 years ago, and
since then cultural influence has been largely
unidirectional, from European to native.
There are also many differences
between Ainu and Northwest Coast societies,
especially in traditional and contemporary
arts. Large sculptures like house posts and
totem poles ornamented with inherited family
animal crests were not made by the Ainu, and
the artistically elaborate mask traditions of
Northwest Coast and Eskimo societies were
not traditionally known among the Ainu, who
never wore masks or produced animal
carvings of any kind until contemporary
times. Similarly, the potlatch—a grand-scale
social ceremony held by most Northwest
Coast cultures which, like totem poles, has
become a signature social emblem of these
groups—had no parallel in Ainu culture
(although the iyomante had a similar central
role in ceremonial life). A host of other
dissimilar material culture characteristics
15.4

Chosama, Chief of Uraashibetsu

Hakyo Kakizaki painted in a contempo¬
rary Japanese style, and his portraits

cotton fabrics, earthenware and porcelain,

could be listed: Northwest Coast hierarchical

lacquerware, glass and metal beads, mirrors, and

social structure and warfare, representation of

metal ornaments also became available. As a

spirits and ancestors, woven blankets, horn

captured those characteristics of the

result, local forging of iron ceased and many

spoons, fish-hook types, and Ainu use of

a Japanese audience. This image is a

other manufacturing procedures that had been

prayer sticks (ikupasuy). Nonetheless,

copy by Teiki Kojima of a Kakizaki

present were no longer practiced in Hokkaido,-

parallels for many traits characteristic of

the Ainu instead began to rely on imported

North Pacific cultures can be found in the

materials produced by the Wajin. These

Ainu region. These links, noted previously,

changes were so profound that one could

exist not only between Ainu and Northwest

almost describe Hokkaido Ainu culture of the

Coast Indians but also between Ainu and

Ainu that were of particular interest to

original. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

thirteenth to fourteenth centuries as "half-

Eskimo, Aleut, and Alutiiq peoples who are

Wajin," at least in terms of material culture.

geographically closer to the Ainu.

Nevertheless, some aspects of Ainu culture

122

Such historical comparisons must be

remained in place, like the tradition of orna¬

treated with caution, considering the distance

mental wood carving found on men's tobacco

and different cultural contexts. Geographic

boxes and knives and the "whorl and thorn”

and ecological similarities make it likely that

designs—whose ancestry can be traced back

cultural patterns linked to subsistence and

archaeologically more than 1,000 years in

adaptation to natural resources could have

HISTORIC PERIOD / M.

KONO AND W

FITZHUGH

arisen due to convergence and independent

affinities in Ainu culture. It is also clear that

invention. When one considers, however, the

development of these ideas needs to be

obvious relationship between the art of the

undertaken incrementally through study of

Ainu and the Amur peoples and the more

the intervening coastal cultures and peoples

distant and generalized similarities between

of northeastern Asia and the Bering Sea

Ainu culture and prehistoric art of the Bering

rather than by direct comparisons with the

Sea and Northwest Coast (Fitzhugh 1988,-

Northwest Coast.

1993), basketry and harpoon technology, and

Of more immediate impact today is the

similar spiritual beliefs and ritual forms

new relationship that has emerged in recent

(including bear and first-salmon ceremonies),

decades as Ainu and Northwest Coast people

there is need to wonder if deeper historic

began to explore each other's cultures and

structure and meaning are involved. New

modern histories. These contacts are enabling

research is likely to show whether similarities

cultural leaders, students, and other members

in basketry techniques and sewing kits arose

of these groups to discover common interests

from recent European-assisted contacts in the

in culture, dance, art, language, and music and

eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Given

to share their different experiences of political

that the strongest northern relationships are

and social history. Both sides have benefited

found in the pre-Ainu Okhotsk culture and

from these contacts, and it seems likely that

that northern maritime traditions are also

the Ainu-Northwest Coast connection will

found in the Jomon period, further research is

continue to create a lively new trans-Pacific

likely to strengthen the evidence for these

axis of native communication.

15/AINU AND THE NORTHWEST COAST

123

E

uropeans had learned about the Ainu

at a very early stage of PortugueseJapanese contacts. Yajiro, or Paul of
the Faith, the translator for Francisco

16/The European

Javier (1506-52)—later and better known

Image of the
Ainu as Reflected
in Museum
Collections

of a white people with long beards and

Josef Kreiner

as St. Francis Xavier—had reported the news

bobbed hair, large in build, who were fearless
fighters like the Germans. About fifty years
after this first account, Father Louis Frois
(1532-92) wrote a letter from Kyoto, dated
March 1, 1565, that provided many more
details (Bickmore 1 868: 366). Fdis is one of
the earliest European descriptions of such
characteristic elements of Ainu culture as
prayer sticks (which he misinterprets,
beginning a long tradition, as moustache

< Mautaroke, Grand Chieftain of
Uraashibetsu
1843 copy by Teiki Kojima after Hakyo
Kakizaki's work, Portraits of Ezo Chief¬

tains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)
16.1,16.2 Early European Views

lifters), forehead-supported burden straps, and
the swords and breastplates made of metal.
His mention of the hairiness of this people

East Asian coasts in 1643. But even while

may have stimulated European imagination

these reports contained great detail, the Ainu

because of the widespread medieval European

did not stir the European imagination as did

belief in "wild men," half-human and half¬

the Japanese during the seventeenth and

fairies, who lived in the woods and were

eighteenth centuries. The latter were the

Early European exploration voyages to
the North Pacific produced some of the
first images of the Ainu to be seen by
Europeans. Adam Johann von
Krusenstern's visit to Sakhalin in 1805
and William Robert Broughton's in

represented in performances and works of art.

model par excellence of an enlightened, innova¬

Frois's reference to the Ainu was included

tive people, who were peaceful but fearless in

in several editions of letters from Jesuit
missionaries and was widely used by contem¬

1796 to Volcano Bay and the Kuriles
produced illustrations (below and

16.2

porary European scholars like Bernhardus

the martial arts.
Suddenly, at the height of the Enlight¬
enment, this positive picture of Japan

above, respectively) imbued with the

Varenius in his Descriptio Recjni Iaponiae (1649).

changed to an entirely negative one: Japan

contemporary European concept of the

There were also firsthand descriptions like that

was included among the backward, non-

noble sauvage. These images, which

of Ignacio Morera da Virigue, who met with an

inventive, despotic "Asiatic" cultures, of no

frequently contain spurious ethno¬

Ainu at Hideyoshi's court in Osaka in 1591, the

interest whatsoever to European thinking. At

missionaries Girolamo de Angelis and Diego

the same time, Japan's role as a model for

graphic detail—for instance, the cloth¬
ing and recurved bow—offer interesting

Carvalho, who stayed in Hokkaido in 1618,

Europe was replaced by two other native

Japanese artists of this same period,

1620, and 1621,- and the Dutch captain

cultures of the Japanese island chain, namely

(courtesy of J. Kreiner)

Maarten Gerritz de Vries, who explored the

the Ryukyuan and the Ainu. The latter were

comparisons with Ainu-e painted by

"rediscovered" at the turn of the nineteenth
century by the great explorers of the North
Pacific, Jean Francois de Galaup, Comte de
la Perouse (1787, in Sakhalin), Adam Johann
von Krusenstern (1805, in Sakhalin,- fig.
16.1) , and William Robert Broughton (179697, in Volcano Bay and the Kuriles,- fig.
16.2) . All three, influenced by the idea of the
noble sauvage as redefined by Rousseau and
disappointed by the current social unrest in
Europe, were looking for other social models
and gathered collections from the societies
they encountered.
The new image of the Ainu conveyed to
Europe by these men was that of a people
living in eternal peace and harmony ("no loud
talking, no immoderate laughter, and still less
any disputing," observed Krusenstern), who
were very honest and hospitable, gifted and
16.1

16 /EUROPEAN IMAGE OFTHE AINU

125

16.3

Philipp Franz von Siebold

talented, cultured, and of so captivating a

received not only maps of the northern islands

Through his association with the Dutch

character that they were considered the best

(as a foreigner, his possession of them later

East Indian Company in Dejima, near

of all people with whom Europeans were

brought about his arrest by the Japanese and

hitherto acquainted. This image of the Ainu

the international "Siebold incident") but also

of the first Europeans to live in Japan

was widely distributed all over Europe by the

manuscripts such as Rinzo Mamiya's Totatsu kiko

for an extended period (1823-39). His

newly published encyclopedias and various

(Travels to Eastern Tartary, which Siebold

voluminous collections and publications

eagerly read descriptions of the world,-

translated in Nippon) and Ainu-language

Nagasaki, Philipp Franz von Siebold, a
medical doctor and naturalist, was one

founded the European field of Japanology
and introduced Ainu culture to the out¬
side world, (etching by Edoardo
Chiossone; courtesy of J. Kreiner)

16.4

Heinrich von Siebold

Philipp’s son Heinrich (1852-1908)
followed his father’s footsteps into
Japanology and Ainu studies and lived
in Japan as a diplomat at the AustroHungarian legation from 1869 to 1896.
His excavations at the Omori shell-

accompanying engravings by European artists

material from his friend Tokunai Mogami.

who had never seen the Ainu depicted them

Mogami escorted Siebold on his return journey

as Greeks with short clothing and reflex bows

to Odawara, providing him with information

on Aegean beaches. Some fifty years later, the

about the Ainu language all the while. The

British admiral Paul B. Whittingham remarked

Ainu collection amassed by Siebold during this

upon meeting a Sakhalin Ainu that he "was a

trip (133 items now in Leiden, Munich, Berlin,

far nobler creature than the Red Indian, who I

and Mannheim,- Kreiner 1996) was largely

always fancied was the pride of wild men."

acquired from Mogami and other Japanese

Philipp Franz von Siebold (fig. 16.3), the

friends and students.

German-born scholar of things Japanese and

Siebold's second son, fdeinrich (fig.

physician to the Dutch outpost at Dejima in

16.4), stationed in Japan from 1869 to 1896

Nagasaki from 1823 to 1829, added another

as a diplomat with the Austro-Hungarian

(photo courtesy of Sekiguchi Tadashi,

important facet to this image: he asserted that

legation, tried to complete his father's studies.

Tokyo, and J. Kreiner)

the Ainu are a people with a history going

He discovered and excavated a shell mound

mound in 1877 led him to propose that
the Ainu, not the Japanese, had been
the original inhabitants of Japan.

16.4

16.3

16.5

Erwin Baelz

back thousands of years on the Eurasian

16.5

in Omori in 1877, simultaneous with his more-

Scholars like Albert L. Bickmore and

continent and that their culture represented a

famous competitor, Edward S. Morse,- however,

Bernhard J. Davis began discussing

very old stage of human civilization In the

contrary to Morse's theory, he believed the

course of his studies of the history, culture,

prehistoric remains to be Ainu settlements. He

society, physical environment, and economy of

postulated that the Ainu were the original

Aryan theories of Ainu origin in the
1860s, but the fullest explication of this
idea came in 1900 from Erwin Baelz,
professor of medicine at the Imperial

Japan and its neighboring countries, he

inhabitants of Japan, thereby starting a heated

University of Tokyo, who believed the

collected a vast amount of material that he

discussion not resolved even today. In 1878

Ainu were the last remnant of a
Caucasoid race that once occupied all

later used to compile his famous multivolume

both Morse and Siebold continued their

series, Nippon (fig. 16.6), which for twenty

research, and both did fieldwork among the

years (1832-52) he self-published after he

Ainu of Hidaka in Hokkaido. Heinrich

of northern Asia, (courtesy of J. Kreiner)

126

settled in Leiden. Siebold's interest in the Ainu

Siebold's new collection, some 177 catalogue

began in early 1826 when he took part at the

entries, was donated in 1888 (together with a

audience of the Dutch chief-merchant in Edo,-

large Japanese collection) to the Austrian

there he met some famous members of the

Emperor. It includes a hoxchiri—a beaded

expeditions to Japan's northern frontiers, sent

amulet worn on the forehead by boys in

out by the shogunate around the turn of the

Sakhalin (see fig. 31.3)—an object so rare that

nineteenth century. From these explorers he

only one other such piece is known to exist,- it

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / J. KREINER

is in the collection of the Rautenstrauch-Joest
Museum in Cologne.
Heinrich von Siebold—as well as nearly

their clothes left over right like Europeans.
The hypothesis of a Caucasian origin
for the Ainu fascinated physical anthropolo¬

all of his contemporaries—insisted that the

gists. Naval officers, diplomats, and travelers

Ainu were an openhearted, communicative,

from various European countries disturbed

generous, honest, and happy people in

Ainu graves to procure skulls for measure¬

contrast to their Japanese rulers, who were

ments, thereby creating diplomatic incidents,-

harshly criticized for their suppression of the

nevertheless, in 1880 the famous German

Ainu. The German ethnographer Wilhelm

anatomist Rudolf Virchow issued an appeal

joest, who was in Hokkaido from 1880 to

to his compatriots in Japan not to lag behind

1881, went so far as to compare an Ainu to

in the procurement of such important

Saint Peter or Sarastro in Mozart's Magic Flute,

scholarly materials.

and he condemned the "tyrannical" Japanese
for teaching the Ainu to lie and deceive.
It is not clear who first theorized about a
possible Caucasian, European, or proto-

The ultimate statement of this school of
thinking was left to the venerated Erwin
Baelz (fig. 16.5), professor of medicine at
Imperial University in Tokyo, who wrote in

European origin of the Ainu, but one of the

1900 that the Ainu are the last remnant of a

earliest proponents was Bernhard J. Davis in

Caucasian race that had once occupied the

1870. He examined Ainu skeletons and

whole of northern Asia. At last Europe, at the

expressed the view that Ainu skulls do not

height of its domination of the world, had

differ much from those of Europeans,- he also

found a people of common origin living in
eternal peace with themselves and nature,
thereby serving as an important model for
Europeans. Ainu culture was thought to
resemble distant common ancestors of
Europeans. This, of course, meant a very
intimate, emotional view of the Ainu on the
one hand and a harsher critique of what was
seen as suppression of "our white relatives"
by the "yellow peril" of Japanese imperialism
on the other. The latter point was only
slightly mitigated by the notion that the
Ainu were also the first inhabitants of the
Japanese islands and were thereby involved
with the development of Japanese language,
culture, and the Japanese people themselves.
Baelz's student, Yoshikiyo Koganei—Ogai
Mori's son-in-law and founder of Japanese

16.6

Bear Ceremony

This lithograph was published in von
Siebold’s multivolume 1832 series,

found that the weights of Ainu brains he

physical anthropology—formulated the idea

studied were far greater than those of all other

that "the Japanese empire once was the

Asian races. Two years before Davis's work,

empire of the Ainu" (Koganei 1893).

Nippon, and introduced Ainu ceremo¬
Albert L. Bickmore noted that the Ainu "call

For the historical evolutionist school

probably done by Shunri Chishima

to mind the bearded peasants in Russia of . . .

within ethnology, especially the so-called

between 1790 and 1820. The bear

the Aryan family . . . they must be regarded as

Vienna school, this assumption that the Ainu

ceremony with its exotic form of

a branch of our Aryan family" (Bickmore

culture represented an extremely old stage of

1868: 360). Other researchers reached similar

human development meant that studying the

nial life to Europe. The painting was

dress, use of swords, inaw, ikupasuy,
and other unusual materials, and its

conclusions when they compared certain

present-day Ainu religion, for instance, would

all performed before the venerated

traits of Ainu culture with European ones:

enable one to interpret paleolithic findings in

remains of a dead and “dressed-up”

after visits to the Ainu of Tsuishikari and the

Middle European caves, as was done by

bear—fascinated Europeans.

Saru valley in 1881, David Brauns (1883)

Wilhelm Koppers (1938) and George

(Dubreuil Collection)

noted that Ainu songs reminded him of

Montandon (1937). This initiated a new wave

Norwegian folksongs. Joest (1882) was

of collecting Ainu material (figs. 16.7, 16.8).

dance, praying, and sake drinking—

impressed by the fact that the Ainu used

Fifty-eight museums in seventeen

knives in the same way as Europeans—that is,

European countries—excluding Russia—

they cut with strokes away from the body—

hold about 6,773 items of Ainu culture. Of

and that Ainu men (unlike Japanese) folded

these, 5,706 items (84 percent) have been

16/EUROPEAN IMAGE OFTHE AINU

1 27

Table 1. European Ainu collections by country
Number of
museums
by country

Germany
United Kingdom
Italy

1

Norway

2
2
3
4
3
2
2
1

Vatican

1

Belgium

1

Hungary
Switzerland
Denmark
France
Netherlands

Romania

1

Spain

1
I

Czech Republic

Recorded
count

Percentage of total
European collection

Verified
count

3,486
864
498
426
327
243
241
240
195
170
36
29
7
6
3
1

5 1.46%
12.75%
7.35%
6.28%
4.82%
3.58%
3.55%
3.54%
2.87%
2.50%
0.53%
0.42%

2,952
619
498
426
169
211
208
238
155
160
32
26
7
0
3
1

24
8

Sweden
Austria

Size of Ainu collections

verified by a survey conducted between 1983

1823 (thirty-seven entries), and by Phillip

and 1986 by a group of scholars at the

Franz von Siebold, who served as the physi¬

Institute of Japanese Studies (University of

cian in Dejima from 1823 to 1829 (eighty-

Bonn) supported by grants from the German

one entries). Both collectors received items

Science Foundation and Toyota Foundation in

for their collections from Japanese friends like

Tokyo. There are another 4,766 items in the

Tokunai Mogami (fig. 16.9) and from various

museums of St. Petersburg (see Ogihara, this

members of the expeditions sent out by the

volume) plus some 800 more in the Russian

Tokugawa Shogunate to explore the northern

Far East, in Khabarovsk, Vladivostok, and

frontier at the turn of the nineteenth century.

Yazhno Sakhalinsk (Kreiner 1993).

Most European Ainu collections were

Compared with the vast number of
objects held in Japanese collections—

nineteenth centuiy, some—like that of the

estimated at 30,000 items—this number

Prussian diplomat Max von Brandt (fifty-two

seems small, even though it is double the

entries at the Museum fur Volkerkunde,

number of some 3,000 objects in U S. and

Berlin, and others at Liibeck and the Museum

Canadian collections. A more thorough

of Mankind, London)—were formed even

analysis of European collections, however,

before the Meiji Restoration. In contrast,

reveals some special characteristics of these

most Japanese Ainu collections were not

holdings that make them extremely valuable

assembled until the 1930s.

in reconstructing the wider panoply of Ainu
culture. First, the majority of the European

128

assembled during the second half of the

Another major difference is that many
of the Japanese holdings—because the

collections were assembled at a very early

collections were assembled relatively late—

stage of contact between Ainu, Japanese, and

were bought through dealers and from curio

Western cultures. The oldest collections,

shops, whereas their European counterparts

assembled during the first half of the eigh¬

were to a greater degree gathered by scholars

teenth centuiy and once part of Czar Peter

of ethnology and anthropology (4 1.6 percent

the Great's Kunstkammer, are now at the

versus 12.2 percent of material purchased

Peter the Great Museum of Anthropology

from dealers). Among the more well-known

and Ethnology (MAE), St. Petersburg. The

scholars who gathered Ainu items are: Erwin

Rijksmuseum foor Volkenkunde at Leiden, the

Baelz, German professor of medicine at

Netherlands, also holds Ainu collections from

Imperial University of Tokyo (eighty-four

the nineteenth century, which were made by

entries at Linden Museum, Stuttgart,- ten

Jan Cock Blomhoff, who directed the trading

entries in Berlin), and his colleague Hans

facility in Dejima (Nagasaki) from 1817 to

Gierke (sixty-five entries in Berlin),- the

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / J. KREINER

ethnographer Wilhelm Joest of Cologne, who

from all over the world. In 1889 his widow

did research work in FJokkaido in 1880-81

opened Umlauff's Weltmuseum, which later

(155 entries divided in Berlin, Dresden,

provided Fritz Lang and other filmmakers

Copenhagen, Cologne, Leiden, and Munich),-

with exotic outfittings.

and the famous linguist Basil Hall Chamber-

16.7

Ainu Exhibitions Begin

Curiosity about the Ainu in Japan and

In 1906-07 Umlauff bought a collec¬

lain (123 entries given to the Pitt-Rivers

tion in two parts comprising nearly seven

Museum at Oxford in 1892). Last but not

hundred Ainu items (two-thirds from

least, the Hungarian Benedict Balogh von

Sakhalin),- individual pieces were well

Barathos, searching for the roots of his

documented in the firm's stock book. The

people, toured northeastern Siberia, Bering

Ainu name for each object is noted, resulting

Strait, and Alaska, and was in Sakhalin and

in the curious entry fushiko-ampe (item of no

Hokkaido in 1913-14. Unfortunately he was

value) for a broken stick! One theory to

there at the outbreak of World War I, and his

explain these Ainu-language notations is that

Europe grew into a program of col¬

collection of 82 1 entries was confiscated by

the Norwegian captain Adrian Jacobsen—

the Satsuma-yashiki in Tokyo in De¬

the Japanese government. When it was

who worked for Umlauff's brother-in-law

cember 1872 and at the Vienna

returned in the early 1920s, Hungary sold a

Hagenbeck and once toured the East Asian

World's Fair in 1873. This photo¬

large part of it (223 entries) to the Museum of

island chain from Sakhalin to Indonesia

Ethnology at Hamburg, including such

(acquiring an Ainu collection of 172 entries

unique items as a coat of mail, only three

for Berlin in 1884-85)—had researched

lecting that resulted in exhibitions at

graph shows a Hokkaido display in
Tokyo from a photograph in The Far

East, An Illustrated Fortnightly News¬
paper, 4 January 1873. (courtesy of

examples of which exist (in the collections of

Umlauff's collection at the Ainu villages he

Prof. P. Pantzer, Bonn, and J. Kreiner)

the Tokyo National Museum, Tohoku Univer-

visited. One of the first museums to buy

16.7

16.8

16.8

Ainu Dwelling Display

During the latter part of the nine¬
teenth century museums developed

sity in Sendai, and in Hamburg). Because most

from Umlauff's stock was the Rautenstrauch-

such items were gathered by researchers

Joest-Museum in Cologne (210 Ainu

themselves, at the very least the villages where

catalogue entries in 1907), and they were

the items were bought or exchanged are

thus able to acquire the most valuable items

new methods for cultural presenta¬
tion, and the unorganized display of
“curiosities" gave way to life-groups

known, this is also true for pieces collected by

(Kreiner and Olschleger 1987). Other

with cultural and psychological con¬

travelers (22.7 percent of the total) like the

museums all over the continent followed,

text. This life-group from a postcard

well-known Isabella Bird, who toured Hok¬

including institutions in Stockholm, Leipzig,

(ca. 1925) was constructed in the

kaido on horseback in 1878 and collected five

Hildesheim (lost in World War II),

pieces now in the Royal Scottish Museum.

Copenhagen, St. Gallen, Frankfurt am Main,

Roemer Museum, Hildesheim, Ger¬
many; displaying a moment in the
domestic life of a Sakhalin Ainu hus¬

One of the biggest collections of Ainu

Freiburg, London, Bucharest, Dresden,- the

band and wife was intended to make

artifacts was formerly owned by Llmlauff's

last collection, acquired by Hamburg, was

Ainu culture seem less exotic and

"world-museum” in Hamburg. Johann Friedrich

bombed in 1944.

more understandable to European

Gustav Umlauff had been a ship's carpenter,

viewers, (courtesy of J. Kreiner)

and when he married the sister of Carl

Diplomats, naval officers, and missionar¬
ies account for only a few collections (about 4

Hagenbeck (later famous as an animal hunter,

percent). Missionary collections of Ainu items

zoo director, and circus manager), he settled

can be found at the Museo Missionario

down and opened a curio shop in Hamburg in

Etnologico at the Vatican (assembled by R

1868, which grew into a well-known trading

Kinold, eighteen entries in 1928), and also at

firm specializing in ethnographica collected

the Horniman Museum, London (from the

16/EUROPEAN

IMAGE OFTHE AINU

129

Church Missionary Society, fourteen entries in

connected with agricultural activities, which are

1952) and the Pitt-Rivers in Oxford (gathered

entirely missing from European museums.

by P. Rousseau, in Muroran, eighty-four entries
in 1900).
While there are thousands of items from

Finally, a map (fig. 16.10) showing the
distribution of Ainu collections in Europe
(again excluding Russia) reveals an interesting

the Hokkaido Ainu in Japanese collections,

pattern: 5 1.5 percent (i.e., 3,486 entries) of

there are astonishingly few from Sakhalin

the holdings in Western Europe are to be

(mostly in Hakodate, Asahikawa, and the

found in German museums. Collections in

National Museum of Ethnology) and even

Hungary, Austria, Switzerland, and the

fewer from the Kuriles (primarily in Hakodate

Netherlands, bring the total amount to 4,467

and at the Tokyo National Museum). European

entries (66 percent). This pattern-—a number

holdings, on the other hand, are divided in

of well-documented collections brought

equal parts between Hokkaido and Sakhalin,-

together by researchers at a comparatively

Russian collections naturally center on the

early time, the focus on objects that show the

latter and include a great number of items from

Ainu as hunters and gatherers, the promi¬

the Kurile Islands. Kurile artifacts are nearly

nence of material from Sakhalin, and collec¬

nonexistent in Western European collections,

tions concentrated in the German-speaking

although there are some small plaited baskets

areas of Middle Europe—seems to need

in Siebold's collection at Leiden, and also in

further explanation.

Berlin and the Musee de l'Homme, Paris.
Another interesting characteristic of

The great attention the Ainu attracted in
Europe resulted in the political use” (and
misuse) of Ainu ethnographic materials. In

16.9 Tokunai Mogami

1872 the Japanese government had commis¬

Philipp Franz and Heinrich von Siebold
both obtained Ainu collections from

sioned the Austrian photographer Raimund

Japanese friends, including Tokunai

von Stillfried to procure Ainu photos for the

Mogami who was a member of various

Viennese World Exhibition of 1873. In 1910 a

northern expeditions sent out by the

joint Japanese-British exhibition, which

Tokugawa Shogunate to explore the

celebrated the successful entente between the

northern frontiers, ca. 1800. (courtesy

two great empires, was held in Shepherd’s

of J. Kreiner)

Bush/Hyde Park in London. From May 14 to
October 29 more than six million visitors saw
what the Times (4 April 1910) described as "no
exaggeration to say that nothing like the
Japanese collections . . . will ever have been
seen before . . . [in] any country." Not to be
outdone by the British Empire, Japan was eager
to present its "aborigines" and brought to
London not only a group of Taiwanese but also
five men, four women, and a child from the
Ainu village of Nibutani to be shown side-byside with the cannons of Port Arthur. Perhaps
it was reasoned that by presenting the Ainu—
then assumed to be a Caucasian people at the
roots of Japanese culture—the victory of an
Asian nation over a European empire (Russia)
European Ainu holdings is that they primarily
center on weapons, hunting and fishing gear,

130

might be more palatable to Europeans.
The Ainu were a major attraction and

baskets for food-gathering, and objects of

were reported upon in every English newspa¬

religion and cult—like prayer sticks (ikupasuy) of

per. One Japanese writer, Toshihiko

which about four hundred are found in the

Nishimura from the Asabi newspaper, ex¬

marvelous collection of the doyen of European

pressed his annoyance at the display of the

Ainu studies, Fosco Maraini, at the Museo

Ainu in his O-bei yuranki (Notes from a

Nationale di Antropologia e Etnologia in

sojourn through Europe and America, Osaka

Florence (Maraini 1942,- and this volume).

1910): "I am convinced that Westerners will

Japanese collections have a greater emphasis on

surely not like the Japanese because placing

clothing and usually include at least a few items

them [the Ainu] in small huts where Western-

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/J. KREINER

16.10

Ainu

Ainu as tme and trustworthy friends of a

Objects in

German adventurer hunting Russian spies in

European Museum

Hokkaido, endangered by typhoons, tsunamis,

Collections

volcanos, bears, and the Japanese police. Much

(after Kreiner 1993)

of this kind of thinking about the Ainu
continues today: schoolbooks reiterate the
hypothesis, long abandoned by the sciences,
that the Ainu are a white European or Cauca¬
sian people of extremely ancient origins, and
the stereotype of the "wild men" can still be
found in crossword puzzles across Europe.
When in 1980 the University of Bonn
invited specialists from libraries, archives,
and museums from several Middle European
countries to discuss the meaning of their
collections for Japanese studies (Kreiner
1981), it quickly became evident that for a
variety of reasons museums especially were
unable to give a detailed description of their
holdings. A vast amount of art and crafts as
well as ethnographical material had been
acquired at the turn of the last century when
Japan resumed contact with the rest of the
world at the end of the Tokugawa
Shogunate, but there was neither enough
staff nor was its training advanced enough to
arrange and classify it. After World War I,
ers look at them like creatures in a zoo reveals

accession stopped nearly completely, and the

our lack of humanity!"

staffs of museums were also depleted. During

The unfortunate Ainu presented in

World War II many important collections

London left 234 objects behind when they

were destroyed, such as the important Ainu

returned to Japan,- some of the items had been

collection of Bronislaw Pilsudski in Warsaw

brought from the Saru valley, but others were

(although his contributions to St. Petersburg

handcrafted in London while they were "on

did survive), or were dispersed. By the time

show." This collection of items is currently

of the conference, the participating institu¬

dispersed between five museums in the U.K.:

tions were ready to start work on a compre¬

Museum of Mankind (seventy-six pieces),

hensive catalogue that would document

Liverpool (sixty-six pieces), Pitt-Rivers (forty-

various aspects of their Japanese collections.

nine pieces), Horniman (thirty-five pieces),
and Cambridge University (eight pieces).
In the 1930s the Third Reich tried to
justify their alliance with Japan by arguing

Different focuses for a pilot project
were discussed, but a consensus was soon
reached to start with a study of Ainu
collections. From the outset one question the

that the Japanese should be treated as equals

project attempted to address was why our

with the German "Aryans" because of their

colleagues placed such great significance on

descendence from Nordic Aryans, that is, the

this part of their treasures. We soon discov¬

Ainu (Friese 1984: 270ff.). This argument was

ered that not only had the material remnants

rejected because the ancient Ainu had

of the Ainu in our museums played an

nothing in common with later Europeans, but

immense role in the history of sciences—

this discussion caused a boom in literature—

anthropology, ethnology, and Japanese

both scholarly and popular—on the Ainu

studies—as well as in the European history

between 1930 and 1940. Included among

of thought, but even more so the study of

these articles and novels was a work of fiction

the Ainu people had played an important

published in Leipzig in 1921 under the

role in Europeans' own self-assessment—and

pseudonym Otfried von Hanstein. Widely

this to a much greater degree than the study

read before the war, the novel presents the

of other peoples and cultures (Kreiner 1993).

16/EUROPEAN

IMAGE OFTHE AINU

i3i

F

or many years anthropologists

The St.
Petersburg
Ainu
Collections
Shinko Ogihara

and museum specialists have known

Siberianists even though they themselves
were unable to conduct field research in the

about the existence of a number of

former Japanese territories of Sakhalin and

Ainu collections in the museums of

the Kuriles or in other areas of the Russian Far

Europe, and recently the presence of Ainu

East and Chukotka. Using the extensive

materials in North American museums has

documentation available in expedition

also been recognized (see Kotani, this

literature and ethnographic collections made

volume). Until now, however, scholars and

when these areas were accessible to both

Ainu people themselves, who have begun

Japanese and Russian researchers (Taksami

taking an active interest in their cultural

1969), Japanese scholars continued to

heritage, have been unaware of a third major

conduct important research on Sakhalin and

source of historical materials that has existed

the Kurile Islands and their peoples, including

for almost one hundred years in the museums

the Ainu. The collections, records, and

of western Russia. The late recognition of

publications of these expeditions are among

these Ainu collections is consistent with the

the most comprehensive studies in existence

history of Soviet relations with foreign

on the Ainu people, even including studies of

researchers, who were generally denied the

the Ainu of Hokkaido, who have been

chance to conduct ethnographic surveys

accessible to western scientists and museum

among the native peoples in Soviet territories.

collectors for 150 years.

It is regrettable that after World War II

Sergei Arutiunov (this volume) has

the political situation between Japan and

discussed published studies by many early

Russia caused several generations of Japanese

Russian scientists, revealing which aspects of

researchers who might have pursued Ainu and

Ainu culture interested scholars during the

Siberian studies to choose other areas of

past century. Here we examine the St.

scholarship. Nevertheless, a number of

Petersburg Ainu collections themselves to

Japanese specialists continued Siberian studies

discover what they reveal about the Ainu who

by following the contributions of Soviet

lived in the northern regions of their territory,

Table l. Ainu collections at the Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography, St. Petersburg

Accession
number
820
4685
810
809
178
733
209
345
811
138
1052
202
615
629
482
656
837
700
3125
839
829
1039
2803
4974
4375 **

Accession
year

Collection
date

1894-95
1826
1840*
1888

pre-1747
1806-07
18th c.
1844
1853-57
1854-55

1891
1897
1879
1882
1880
1890
1868
1891
1899
1902
1904
1903
1903-05
1904
1906(2)
1906
1914
1947

1879-80
1879
1880-82
1880

1902-04
1902-03
1903-05
1903
1902-05
1902-05
1902-05
1947

Collector

Place of collection

Kunstkammer
G. 1 Davydov
Admiralty
1 G. Voznesenskii
L. I. Shrenk
R. K. Maak
P. I. Suprunenko
A. V. Grigor'ev
A. V. Grigor'ev
P. S. Poljakov
P. S. Poljakov
P. 1. Suprunenko
Russian Geographical Society
Russian Geographical Society
K. N. Pos'et
L. Shternberg
B. Pilsudski
B. Pilsudski
B. Pilsudski
B. Pilsudski,- Shiroszewski
B. Pilsudski
B. Pilsudski
B. Pilsudski
M. G. Levin, I. P. Lavrov

Kurile Islands
Sakhalin Island
Kurile Islands
Kurile Islands
Amur
Sakhalin Island
Sakhalin Island
Ezo Island (Hokkaido)
Ezo Island (Hokkaido)
Sakhalin Island
South Sakhalin
Sakhalin Island
Sakhalin Island
Northeast Asia
Sakhalin, Aleutian Islands
Sakhalin Island, Primore
Sakhalin Island
Sakhalin Island
Sakhalin Island
Ezo Island (Hokkaido)
Sakhalin Island
South Sakhalin
Sakhalin Island
Sakhalin Island

* date uncertain
** no data listed in MAE register

132

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS /S. OGIHARA

1

w,

'

.r

:

A-

graphic, archaeological, and physical

tfT \,,AT ' . A ■ -

anthropological specimens from all over the

ITT
7 ■ V ji
A'! 7. , ;};i
.1
i

world, among them Ainu materials that have
never before been accessible to Japanese

fehoT w

Ainu scholars.
The Ainu collections of the MAE,
which are now stored in the attic of the
Russian Academy of Sciences building next
door to the museum, were found to be in
such excellent condition that it was hard to
believe that so many years had passed since
they were collected. According to MAE
records, the museum possesses twenty-five
separate Ainu collections that include 879
listings and 1,890 individual pieces (Table 1).
Of these, our research group succeeded in
documenting 1,400 specimens from all
twenty-five collections. (Discrepancies in
these numbers can be attributed to materials
transferred in exchanges with other ethno¬
logical museums, and some materials proved
to be inaccessible. We also decided not to
include archaeological materials [accession
no. 4974] in our survey.) Our method was to
photograph and sketch everything and
gather original catalogue data as well as
record our own observations about the
material. Our preliminary results suggest that
the MAE collections contain a vast treasure
trove of Ainu research material previously

17.1

Kurile Robe

This robe of woven elm bark (attush)
from the Kuriles was accessioned
by the Museum of Anthropology and
Ethnology in 1826. Its original date
of collection is not known, but it is
from one of the earliest Ainu collec¬
tions, thought to have been formed
as early as 1700. Place of collection
is unknown, but because elm does
not grow in the northern Kuriles, it
probably came from the southern
Kuriles where attush could be ob¬
tained from Hokkaido. (MAE 810-4)

the Kurile Islands and southern Sakhalin. This
collection inventory was conducted in 1995
and 1996 by Japanese and Russian scientists
organized by the author and Chuner
Mikhailovich Taksami, Director of the
Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography
(MAE) in St. Petersburg, with support from
the Japanese Government Cultural Agency
(Monbusho). Our team consisted of ethnolo¬
gists and curators from the Siberian Division
of the MAE and Japanese specialists from
various museums in Hokkaido and Tokyo.
The MAE was established by Peter the
Great at the beginning of the eighteenth
century as a Kunstkammer (art cabinet), a name
that is still used to refer to the oldest part of
the museum. Peter had a great interest in
natural science and took a strong interest in
the development of the museum's early
collections, which include such wonders as
the syphilitic bones of his seven-foot-tall
personal valet, a two-headed calf, and other
"natural" curiosities including minerals and
ethnological collections from Russian
America. Over the centuries the MAE has
accumulated enormous collections of ethno¬
17/ST. PETERSBURG COLLECTIONS

unknown to western and Asian scholars.
An Ainu Inheritance from the
Eighteenth to Twentieth Centuries
According to the MAE register, the oldest
Ainu collection (accession no. 810) was
brought from the Kurile Islands by the
Admiralty Department in 1826 (fig. 17.1).
Because the accession date indicates the year
when these objects were transferred to MAE,
the date on which they were collected must
be earlier. The earliest MAE Ainu collection
is thought to date from around 1700 but is
recorded in the register as being from
Kunstkammer (accession no. 820) without a
year recorded,- this collection may have been
saved from a fire in 1747 that burned down
the Kunstkammer after it had been in
existence for twenty years. The most recent
addition to the Ainu collection was obtained
by an Amur-Sakhalin expedition in 1947.
Thus, the accession numbers and dates
indicate that Ainu materials have been
gathered by the MAE over nearly two-and-ahalf centuries. A list of collections arranged
by the year in which they seem to have been
133

obtained in the field shows a burst of activity

is testament to the unique people that was

in the decades around the turn of the twenti¬

exterminated by this policy. The register

eth century (Table 1). The lengthy gaps

indicates that three collections came from

between 1855 and 1880 mark a dearth of

the Kurile Islands, but further place-names

ethnological collecting between the early

are lacking. In Japanese, the Kurile Islands

exploration era and the beginnings of

are called Chishima, meaning the "thousand

scientific anthropology,- by contrast, the long

islands" because so many small land masses

gap between 1905 and 1947 can be attributed

comprise the chain that stretches from

to political events that were not conducive to

Hokkaido to Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula.

ethnological study in Sakhalin, including the

Geographically, they are usually distin¬

In 1839 Ilya Vosnesenski visited and

disastrous outcome (for Russia) of the Russo-

guished as South, Middle, or North

gathered collections from Alaska and

Japanese war in 1905, the Bolshevik Revolu¬

Chishima, a partition that implies different

tion and ensuing military confrontations in

ecological environments, different local

17.2

Kurile Boat Model

the Northwest Coast, and in 1844 he
visited northern Chishima (northern

the Amur region, and World War II. Unlike

cultures, and different historical back¬

objects, including bows, arrows, quivers,

most of the Ainu materials held in Japanese

grounds. For this reason it is important to

three boat models, two baskets, a

museums, which generally lack documenta¬

identify the islands from which particular

grass bag, and a Japanese lacquered

tion on the date and place of collection, that

materials originated so that they can be

information is available on the MAE collec¬

attributed to a specific local Ainu group, but

Kuriles), where he obtained twenty-two

cup. One of the boat models, seen
here, has a mast and six pairs of oars

tions, which renders them particularly

that information is unfortunately lacking

North Chishima boats documented in

significant for reconstructing the cultural

from the MAE records.

written sources. (MAE 809-10)

history of the Ainu.

and is a seagoing vessel similar to

Accession no. 820 contains thirteen

-.

.
aSiay-.-..

17.2
17.3

17.3
Coiled-Grass Basket

Vosnesenski also obtained several

Kurile Islands Collections

items: sword sheaths, a dagger sheath, knife

decorated coiled-grass baskets (tenki)

MAE Ainu collections originate from all three

sheaths, garments, bags, a mg, and a box. The

with lids in 1844. These baskets are

areas where Ainu used to live: the Kurile

two garments are made of Japanese indigo-

almost identical to baskets made by

Islands, Sakhalin Island, and Hokkaido

dyed cotton, and one has embroidered

(known in early historical accounts as Ezo).

ornamentation: according to ethnographic data

and may indicate contact or exchange

Because Kurile Ainu materials are scarce in

about the Kurile Ainu, this type of garment was

between these regions. (MAE 810-13)

any museum collections, the MAE collections

worn on South Chishima, where other material

(no. 809, 8 10, and 820) are extremely rare

of apparent Japanese origin is also found.

and important. The three early collections

Similarly, a garment in accession no. 810—a

from the Kurile Islands were accessioned by

typical Ainu kimono (fig. 17.1) of woven elm

the museum between 1747 and 1840, early

(bast fiber)—implies a South Chishima origin,

dates that render them especially valuable.

because elm does not grow in the Kuriles and

Beginning in 1 875 and again in 1884 the

so the fiber or garment must have been

Kurile Ainu were forced by the Japanese

obtained by trade from Hokkaido. The other

government to emigrate south, to Shikotan

objects include a smoking pipe, a wooden pipe,

Island, a displacement that led to the disap¬

and a leather quiver. Unfortunately, the place

pearance of an entire ethnic group and its

of origin of these materials is more difficult to

culture, but the presence of these collections

identify accurately.

Koryaks and southwest Alaskan Yup'ik
Eskimos in the late nineteenth century

t34

MUSEUM

COLLECTIONS /S. OCIHARA

Accession no. 809 contains bows,

Collections from

arrows, quivers, three boat models (including

Sakhalin and Hokkaido

two ocean-going varieties,- fig. 17.2), two

Materials from the Sakhalin Ainu dominate

baskets, a grass bag, and a fine Japanese

the MAE Ainu collections. Six of the sixteen

lacquer cup with gold-foil ornamentation.

collections with Sakhalin artifacts were

One of the boat models has a mast, sail

gathered by Bronislaw Pilsudski, including

ropes, and six pairs of oars, while the other is

accessions no. 700, 829, 1039, 2803, and

a five-oar boat. These boats are of particular

3125 from Sakhalin and no. 839, which was

interest because they are similar to the boats

obtained from Hokkaido in 1903 when

known to have been used in North Chishima

Pilsudski worked with W. Shiroszewski.

17.4 Sakhalin Hospitality

(northern Kuriles), which suggests that they

Polish scholar Bronislaw Pilsudski stud¬

Because of Pilsudski's profound perceptions

derive from this location. This conclusion is

about the Ainu and other native groups, the

supported by the presence of coiled-grass

collections that he gathered reflect the entire

After returning home he became finan¬

baskets,- this basket-making technique was

life and culture of the Sakhalin Ainu (fig.

cially destitute and sold sets of photo¬

common to such North Pacific peoples as

17.4). They not only cover every aspect of

graphs to various Western museums.

the Koryaks, Aleuts, and Yup'ik Eskimos of

daily life but also contain material from

the Bering Sea. In addition to Russian

different villages throughout the island. In

ied the Sakhalin Ainu 1902-05 and
made extensive collections for the MAE.

This shot documents a sake-drinking
ceremony in which the host is passing a
cup (tuki) with a prayer stick (ikupasuy)
across its top to a European, possibly

colonists, the North Chishima islands are

general, these collections are ethnographi-

known to have been populated by Aleuts,

cally outstanding for this thoroughness and

Pilsudski or his colleague, W.

Kamchadals, and others with whom the

because his knowledge of Ainu culture is

Shiroszewski. (NAA 93-12687)

Ainu had trade relations. Another decisive

everywhere evident in the collection docu¬
mentation. Moreover, Pilsudski made an
effort to obtain the Ainu-language names of
each object in addition to his ethnological
descriptions of the artifacts,- many of these are
found in the register of the MAE, quite often
written on the objects themselves. These
linguistic data are precious for the study of
Sakhalin Ainu language, which has been
extinct for many years, for they are the only
means for determining how one Ainu dialect
relates to an other. Bronislaw Pilsudski's
detailed contributions to Sakhalin Ainu
ethnography allow scholars to reconstruct
this culture in almost all of its basic elements,
and his collections, preserved in the MAE,
will be of great value to future scholars and
Ainu people.
The MAE also has an important
collection of Hokkaido Ainu material (no.
839) whose dates and places of collection
are known. Recently, our research group

piece of evidence indicating a North

continued its work in the Ainu collections of

Chishima origin of these materials (fig. 17.3)

the Russian Ethnographic Museum, also in

is the documented route of the MAE Russian

St. Petersburg. This museum has a large

collector, I. G. Voznesenskii, who had

number of Ainu collections gathered in 1912

traveled by boat along the Middle and

from several places in Hokkaido, and

North Chishima coast in 1844 (Alekseev

research now underway will greatly enrich

1977: 69-70) and visited other North Pacific

the knowledge gained from the MAE

locations in the Aleutians and Russian

collections about the Hokkaido Ainu at the

America beginning in 1839.

beginning of the twentieth century.

17/ST.

PETERSBURG

COLLECTIONS

135

O

VER THE PAST FIFTEEN YEARS

Ainu
Collections in
North
America:
Documentation
Projects and the
Frederick Starr
Collections
Yoshinobu Kotani

Because most of these museums concentrate

museum and archival surveys

on North American cultures, we discovered

have resulted in a comprehen¬

that their Ainu collections were poorly

sive inventory of Ainu cultural

known and that American anthropologists

materials including objects, photograph

today know little about the Ainu. Our focus

collections, and archival resources in Euro¬

was not only on ethnographic specimens:

pean and North American museums. The first

archival materials like accession papers, slides,

of these surveys was organized by Josef

photographs, old correspondence, and field

Kreiner of the University of Bonn, Germany.

notes were also inspected to help reconstruct

Kreiner's survey, conducted with the assis¬

the circumstances under which the object

tance of European colleagues and Toshikazu

collections were made. During the course of

Sasaki of Tokyo National Museum, revealed

the project, several museums with large

about 5,700 Ainu objects—a surprisingly

collections were visited several times.

large number—in western European museums
(Kreiner 1993). Concurrently, from 1983 to

In March 1992 we paid a second visit to
the National Museum of Natural History,

1985, a joint Polish-Japanese project had

Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.,

begun investigating Bronislaw Pilsudski's early

where I shared with William W. Fitzhugh the

twentieth-century sound recordings on the

purpose of the survey project and my long-

Ainu and other unpublished materials from

cherished idea for an Ainu exhibition based

the Sakhalin region (Kato and Kotani 1987).

on materials drawn from a wide variety of

My own efforts to inventory American

Ainu collections. Several times during the

collections was modeled on the work of Josef

next few years I invited Fitzhugh to Japan to

Kreiner (see Kreiner, this volume). These

explore for himself the possibility of such an

surveys, conducted between 1990 and 1996,

exhibition, and we visited various museums

identified approximately 3,200 Ainu ethno¬

together and met with a number of scholars.

graphic specimens and associated archival

Simultaneously, the documentation team

holdings in natural history and art museums in

traveled to Washington, Philadelphia, New

the United States and Canada (Kotani 1993a,

York, and Chicago to complete the inventory

b, 1997). This project brought long-forgotten

and held seminars and discussions about the

North American collections to the attention

exhibition plans.

of scholars and Ainu people,- it also provided
the stimulus for the current exhibition.
In 1990, based on contacts with more
than one hundred museums, our North

The final stage in the epic series of
inventory projects began in 1995, when
Shinko Ogihara of Chiba University em¬
barked on the task of inventorying the

American Ainu Documentation Project team

Russian collections with her Russian col¬

visited more than two dozen museums and

league, Dr. Chuner Taksami (see Ogihara, this

several private collectors in North America to

volume). Cumulatively, efforts of all the

gather firsthand data on each Ainu specimen.

documentation teams have brought us quite

Table 1: Major Collectors before 1913
Year

Collector

Provenance (in Hokkaido)

Present Depository

1877-78

Morse, E. S.

Central

Peabody Essex Museum

1888

Hitchcock, R.

Eastern and Central, S. Kuriles

National Museum of Natural History

1888

Odium, E.

Eastern

Royal Ontario Museum

1890s

Curtis, W. W.

Central

Historical Museum of Hokkaido

1890s

Pettee, J. H.

Central

Hood Museum, Dartmouth College

1900

Dean, B.

Saru R. Valley, Volcano Bay

American Museum of Natural History

1901

Hiller, H. M.

Volcano Bay and Iburi Coast

University Museum,

1904

Starr, F.

Saru R. Valley and Shiraoi

Brooklyn Museum of Art

Peabody Museum, Harvard University

and Iburi Coast
University of Pennsylvania
1904

Simms, S. C.

Hakodate

Field Museum of Natural History

1910

Starr, F.

Obihiro and Memuro

Brooklyn Museum of Art

1912

Starr, F.

Piratori

Brooklyn Museum of Art

1912

Culin, S.

Saru R Valley

Brooklyn Museum of Art

1912

Batchelor, J.

Saru R. Valley

Brooklyn Museum of Art

Starr, F.

Volcano Bay

Logan Museum of Anthropology,

1912

Beloit College

J. Oyabe

136

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / Y.

KOTANI

close to having a master inventory of Ainu

This distribution pattern reveals that

material culture for the entire world.

the natural history museums in the eastern

The North American

industry and government were originally

Ainu Collections

located, are the repositories of most Ainu

United States and Canada, where the seats of

Table 1 lists some of the major North American

materials. Natural histoiy museums in the
West, which were founded after 1910,

collections of Ainu artifacts gathered before

arrived too late to collect Ainu specimens in

1912 and their current repositories. Table 2
summarizes the distribution of Ainu specimens

Ainu villages,- by this time most specimens of
historic value had been sold or collected, and

in North American museums. These tables
reveal a distinct regionality in the distribution of

the Ainu were producing artifacts for the
tourist trade. Eastern institutions with Ainu

Ainu collections in North America: namely,
older Ainu collections tend to be concentrated
in the East and Midwest, while those in western

collections include: the National Museum of
Natural History, Smithsonian Institution
(founded 1846),- the American Museum of

institutions, including Hawaii, are relatively
recent and rather few in number. Furthermore,

Natural History, New York (founded 1869);
the Columbian Museum (now Field Museum)

older collections (those secured before 1912)
are fairly well documented in terms of location,

of Natural History, Chicago (founded 1 893),the Peabody Museum of Natural History,

names of collectors, date of collection, and

Yale University, New Haven (founded 1869),-

object-level information, while the recent

and the Llniversity of Pennsylvania Museum

collections often lack basic scientific data.

of Archaeology and Anthropology, Philadel¬

These regional characteristics can be attrib¬
uted, in part, to various factors in the history of

phia (founded 1887). In addition, the
Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences (now

museums and the development of North

the Brooklyn Museum of Art), New York,

American anthropology.

was actively collecting Ainu materials by the
first decade of this century (Danilov 1990).
Table 2: Major Ainu Collections in North America

Number of Specimens

Financed by the growing wealth of
Canada

industrialized eastern North America, these
5

museums sponsored large scientific expedi¬

88

tions to various areas of the world to collect

Peabody Essex Museum, Salem, MA

140

materials (see Fitzhugh, this volume). One

Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA

150

Hood Museum, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH

20

Peabody Museum of Natural History, Yale University, New Haven, CT

74

Canadian Museum of Civilization, Hull, Quebec
Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Ontario

natural history specimens, including Ainu

Eastern United States

good example of such a trip can be seen in
the Ainu collection gathered by Hiram M.

Brooklyn Museum of Art, Brooklyn, NY

ca. 950

Hiller, who was sent to Borneo to acquire

American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY

ca. 430

natural history collections,- he also traveled

Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, NY

4

National Museum of the American Indian, New York, NY

9

Buffalo Museum of Science, Buffalo, NY

77

Robert J. Smith Collection, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY

50

Llniversity Museum, Llniversity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

ca. 315

National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC

ca. 190

The Textile Museum, Washington, D.C.

to Japan where he gathered Ainu specimens,
which were later transferred to the Univer¬
sity of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology
and Anthropology.

3

Anthropology and
Midwestern United States
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ml

7

Milwaukee Public Museum, Milwaukee, WI

220

Logan Museum of Anthropology, Beloit College, Beloit, WI

68

Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, 1L

ca. 215

University of Chicago Library, Chicago, 1L

THE AlNU-CAUCASOID HYPOTHESIS
During the mid-nineteenth century, the
notion of ancient Ainu-Caucasoid connec¬
tions began to take root in Europe, particu¬

(archival materials)

larly among German-speaking people.
Western United States

According to this hypothesis, the Ainu were a

Burke Memorial Washington State Museum & Henry Art Gallery,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA

18

remnant of ancient Germanic peoples who

Seattle Art Museum, Seattle, WA

12

once occupied continental Europe. This idea

Llniversity of Oregon, Eugene, OR

39

was attractive to Europeans because it posited
the continuing existence of an early European

Hearst Museum of Anthropology, Llniversity of Califiornia, Berkeley, CA

43

Fowler Museum of Cultural History, University of California, Los Angeles, CA

19

Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History, Los Angeles, CA

47

Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu, HI

40

hunting-and-gathering people and because of
the romantic notion of a "Caucasoid' ethnic
group surrounded by a sea of Mongoloids.

18 / NORTH

AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

4 37

18.1 Smoking Kit
Together with their knives (makiri),
Ainu men carried smoking kits
(tanpakuop) consisting of a tobacco
box, a pipe, and a pipe holder. The

Although some racial and linguistic

devoted to the Sakhalin Ainu and brought

theories were advanced (see Arutiunov and

about forty Sakhalin Ainu specimens to the

Ishida, this volume), this hypothesis was

American Museum of Natural History

never rigorously tested and has largely been

(Kendall 1988 and this volume).

hexagonal or octangular shape of the

ignored by twentieth-century anthropolo¬

tobacco boxes is similar to that of

gists. However, an undercurrent of belief in

Japanese medicine cases (inro). Pipes,

an Ainu-Caucasoid link remains, not only in

It is no coincidence that most of the large

Europe but also in North America where a

Ainu collections in America were assembled

made of hardwood with stems as long

U.S.-Japanese Relations

as 15 inches (40 cm), were carried in

large number of scientists with German

during the period of peaceful relations that

Each had a hole in one end through

backgrounds and professional training in

existed between the United States and Japan

which the pipe stem was passed, allow¬

Germany have been active.

throughout the Meiji Era (1868-1912).

pipe holders that resemble ikupasuy.

ing the bowl to be socketted securely.
Pipes were carved with curvilinear or

The late nineteenth century, the

Immediately after the reopening of Japan at

period in which museums had an intense

the onset of the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the

geometric designs but never with ani¬

interest in collecting Ainu material culture,

Japanese government invited American

found on ikupasuy. Ainu custom called

was also the period in which anthropology

scientists and engineers to Hokkaido to

for "pipe exchanges” when two men

and ethnology became professionalized in the

conduct surveys and help with plans for

met for the first time; each shared a

United States. As was the case with natural

agricultural and natural resource development,-

history museums, the East Coast again played

one of these visitors was General Horace

a crucial role as a developing center of

Capron. Capron served as Secretary of
Agriculture under President Ulysses S. Grant

mals, boats, or landscapes such as are

smoke from the other’s pipe. This pipe
set was acquired in 1876 from geolo¬
gist Benjamin Smith Lyman, an early
U.S. advisor sent to assist with

university and museum anthropology. Franz

Japan’s economic development.

Boas (1 858-1942), who is often cited as the

from 1869 to 1877, and for a period of that

(NMNH E22259)

father of American anthropology, was initially

tenure—between 1871 and 1875—was a

138

trained in geography in Germany and

senior adviser to the Hokkaido Development

emigrated to the United States in the 1870s,-

Agency. Another visitor was William Smith

he started his long and influential teaching

Clark, an agricultural specialist and educator

career in anthropology at Columbia Univer¬

who was invited to Sapporo in 1876-77 to

sity in the late 1890s. Boas was a close

help found the Imperial College of Agriculture,

associate of Frederick Starr and Stewart Culin,

the forerunner of today's Hokkaido University.

who became famous for their collecting work

Benjamin Smith Lyman, a geologist, lived in

among the Ainu (see Poster, this volume),- the

Hokkaido from 1872 to 1881, where he

three worked closely to restructure the

explored the region's potential mining re¬

American Anthropological Association during

sources and helped train Japanese geologists.

the late 1890s (Hyatt 1990). Simultaneously,

Other professionals were invited to teach basic

Boas initiated the Jesup North Pacific

courses in science and English at Tokyo

Expedition (1 897-1902), the largest anthro¬

Imperial University and other institutions,-

pological field investigation ever undertaken

among these were Edward S. Morse, Romyn

to study and collect from the peoples of the

Hitchcock, E. Odium, and Bashford Dean,

North Pacific Rim. One of the Jesup studies,

who, in addition to other activities, traveled in

conducted by Berthold Laufer in 1898, was

Hokkaido and collected Ainu artifacts.

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / Y.

KOTANI

Edward Sylvester Morse, a marine

between the Ainu and field collectors sent by

biologist, came to Tokyo in 1 877 and became

American museums. Inazo Nitobe, who had

the first to conduct scientific archaeological

once studied at Johns Hopkins University in

excavations at the Omori shell mound in

Baltimore and at the University of Bonn,

Tokyo Bay. Later, he traveled widely in Japan

Germany, was professor at the Hokkaido

and took Ainu and Japanese ethnographic

Agriculture College, Sapporo,- during the late

collections hack to the Peabody Museum

1890s, he was apparently asked by Arthur

(now Peabody Essex Museum) in Salem,

Curtiss James, a patron of the American

Massachusetts. Unfortunately, there are no

Museum of Natural History, to make

records documenting where and how Morse

collections of Ainu specimens for the

assembled his Ainu collection.

museum. Nitobe sent about forty specimens,

In 1888 both Romyn Hitchcock

representing both Hokkaido and Sakhalin

(Hitchcock 1891a, b) and E. Odium traveled in

Ainu, in response to this request Games,

the southern Kurile Islands as well as in central

unpublished letter, AMNH). Jenichiro

and eastern Hokkaido, securing more than two

Oyabe, was a Japanese citizen who pursued

hundred Ainu specimens (figs. 18.1, 18.2).

an unusual course in the United States and in

Most of these objects are at the National

his native country: he graduated from

Museum of Natural History, Washington, DC.,-

General Armstrong's Indian School in

about fifty specimens are held by the Royal

Virginia, then did undergraduate work at

Ontario Museum in Toronto. Because

Howard University in Washington, D C.,

Hitchcock and Odium traveled together, their

and later seems to have spent a year or so at

collections can be considered as a single one for

Yale University. After returning to Japan, he

purposes of analysis.
Bashford Dean, a professor of marine
biology at Columbia University who also

started an Ainu school at Abuta, Hokkaido,
where he gave basic instruction to Ainu
youth. In 1900 he and his associate, Ryujiro

became a distinguished collector of armor,

Shirai, guided Hiram M. Hiller to Ainu

came to Tokyo Imperial University to collect

villages on the Iburi Coast and in the Saru

marine samples at the Misaki Marine Labora¬

River valley and helped Hiller collect some

tory south of Yokohama. In the summer of

240 Ainu items for the University of Penn¬

1900 he went to Hokkaido to visit Ainu

sylvania Museum (see Katz, this volume).

villages on the north shore of Volcano Bay, on

This period of cooperation lasted

the Iburi Coast, and in the Saru River valley.

nearly forty years before the decade of 1910

Here he secured about 250 Ainu artifacts,

to 1920 brought a drastic deterioration in

which he transferred, through Franz Boas, to

United States-Japan relations, primarily

the American Museum of Natural History.

because of changes in LI S. immigration

Deans "Catalogue of Aino [sic] Collection"

policy,- the outbreak of World War 1 and the

(Dean 1901), classifies his Ainu specimens in

beginning of the Russian Revolution also

eleven categories: costume,- jewelry and pipe-

made it impossible for any European or

cases,- arms,- hunting and fishing implements,-

American museums to consider sending

medicine,- kitchen objects—platters, bowls,

expeditions to Siberia or Hokkaido. By the

spoons, mortars and pestles, and baskets,-

1920s the era in which American museums

weaving apparatus and mats,- religious and

sponsored expeditions to Japan had ended.

ceremonial objects,- house and boat models,-

18.2

Beaded Necklace

This necklace (tamasay) was col¬

anatomical materials,- and photographs. He

Missionaries in Hokkaido

made a brief description for each item and

In addition to governmental cooperation, the

gave the name of the village where he secured

presence of Christian missionaries in

it. This list is one of the best records of any

Hokkaido was an important element

Ainu collection in North America, and in my

encouraging American scientists to visit and

opinion, it clearly reflects the high standards

assemble museum collections there. One of

attractive size and color contrast; the

adhered to by collectors who had received

these missionaries, Rev. John Batchelor, who

small dull beads are made of lead.

professional training in the natural sciences.

served as a member of the Church Missionary

lected by Alexander Agassiz from
Storop Island in the Kuriles. Its small
black and large blue beads create an

Ainu artifacts from the Kuriles are
quite rare because of the removal of
Ainu after 1875 from most of the

The Meiji government also sent Japa¬

Society, deserves special attention. Batchelor

nese students to the Llnited States and Europe

lived in Hokkaido for some sixty years, from

to study science and technology. Some of the

1877 until 1940. Today he is regarded as a

flicts with Russian sea-otter hunters.

students returning from the United States

pioneer student of Ainu culture and language,

(PMC 51625)

acted as translators and intermediaries

which he documented in many publications

northern Kurile Islands due to con¬

18/NORTH AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

139

including several important Ainu dictionaries.

Ainu Collections and Social Change

He also donated about thirty Ainu specimens to

Museum collections are a valuable and

the British Museum in London (Kreiner 1987).
Batchelor helped several American

frequently overlooked resource for the study
of social and cultural change, and the Ainu

scientists who sought to collect Ainu materi¬

collections in North America are especially

als directly from village people, rather than,

valuable in this regard. Older collections tend

as was sometimes done, from antique and

to include a wider range of specimens, such as

curio shops that occasionally acquired Ainu

tools for subsistence activities, pot-hangers,

materials. Batchelor guided Frederick Starr

animal skulls decorated with inaw-kike, and so

18.3 Starr’s Ainu Group in Tokyo

to Ainu villages in the Saru River valley (figs.

forth More recent collections from West

Preparing for the St. Louis Exposition of

18.3-18.7), where he succeeded in recruiting

Coast museums, the majority of them secured

1904, anthropologist Frederick Starr

nine Ainu volunteers to travel with him to

after World War I, invariably contain larger

traveled to Hokkaido and recruited a
party of Ainu. Here the group is seen

the Louisiana Purchase Centennial Exposi¬

percentages of religious or ceremonial
utensils, such as lacquerware bowls, stands,

before their departure from Tokyo: elder

tion held in 1904 in St. Louis (Starr 1904,-

Ainu men were bearded and the women

VanStone 1993). Bashford Dean and Stewart

platters, and large containers. A similar trend

had lip tattoos; by this time, conforming

Culin also seem to have sought Batchelor's

was reported by Josef Kreiner among the

to Japanese custom, younger men no

advice before embarking on their collecting

European materials (Kreiner 1987).

longer wore beards. (Ainu women contin¬
ued to tattoo their lips until the 1930s.)
The strong “Caucasoid” look of the men
probably influenced Starr's selection of
them. (UOL 33-80-5)

expedition to Volcano Bay, the Iburi Coast,
and the Saru River.

It has long been known that tradi¬
tional subsistence activities among the Ainu

Several other missionaries collected

declined or were abandoned wholesale in

Ainu specimens: James H. Pettee, who resided

response to 'lapanization'' policies insti¬

flail

gill

ls.3

18.4

18.4 The Ainu Group in St. Louis

in Sapporo during the 1890s, brought back

Field Museum photographer Charles

twenty Ainu specimens to the Hood Mu¬

Restoration. During the 1880s and 1890s,

seum, Dartmouth College, New Hampshire.

the numbers of Japanese immigrants who

Carpenter and Jesse Tarbox Beals, who
was the official photographer of the

tuted soon after the beginning of the Meiji

Louisiana Purchase Centennial Exposi¬

William W. Curtis, who was based in Sapporo

emigrated from southern islands to Hok¬

tion, each took a number of photographs

at about the same time, collected more than

kaido, where they settled as farmers and

of the Ainu group during their stay in

fifty Ainu specimens and brought them back

fishermen, dramatically increased,- this

St. Louis. The photographers had rather

to the Llnited States. These items were long

influx put tremendous pressure on tradi¬

held under the care of Dr Robert J. Smith of

tional Ainu culture and lifeways. The

different styles. Beals’s shots are
close-up and personal, showing Ainu

Cornell University and were recently donated

modernization that accompanied these

work activities. This image, which is

to the Hokkaido Historical Museum in

changes made many traditional technolo¬

more formal and distant, is probably

Sapporo. Because the primary goal of our

gies— for instance, marine and freshwater

by Carpenter. It seems that the young

project was to create an inventory of material

fishing equipment—obsolete, and so these

men, who no longer wore beards at

culture, we have left untouched archival

items were sold to collectors in the 1 880s

materials, including those of John Batchelor,

and 1 890s. lapanization also resulted in the

in relaxed poses engaged in various

home, have been growing them, perhaps
to conform to visitor’s preconceptions
about the Ainu. (NAA 98-10290)

\i o

which are held in the Church Missionary

replacement of Ainu houses with Japanese-

Society Collection at the Llniversity of

style houses and the appearance of wood

Birmingham Library, Llnited Kingdom, and

stoves. Consequently, women were willing

those of William W. Curtis, which are at the

to sell old open-hearth equipment, such as

Oberlin College Library in Oberlin, Ohio.

pot-hangers These radical lifestyle changes

MUSE LI M COLLECTIONS / Y. KOTANI

also affected religious and ritual behavior,

Lafayette in geology in 1885 (Cole 1934,

although some ceremonies, such as bear-

Evans 1991). He began teaching at Coe

and fox-sending ceremonies, continued to

College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in 1884, and in

be performed.

18.5 Comparing Notes
The 1904 St. Louis Exposition

professor and curator at the Chautauqua

village lifeways underwent tremendous change.

Institute. The following year he was ap¬

By this time, even the long-enduring lacquer-

pointed curator of ethnology at the Ameri¬

ware and religious objects, which the Ainu had

can Museum of Natural History, New York,-

treasured and with which they rarely parted,

when the University of Chicago was

lost their cultural power and many were sold.

established, he was appointed assistant

Around 1930 Japanese museums started

professor in the Department of Sociology and

collecting Ainu specimens that were being

Anthropology in 1892 and continued to hold

abandoned or discarded in response to

this post until his retirement in 1923.

Japanization. More recent Ainu collections in

Although his earliest professional interests
were in geology and biology, Starr had turned

must have been a remarkable
experience for native participants;

1 888 he returned to his birthplace to became

During World War I and thereafter, Ainu

it brought peoples from far corners

the United States, particularly those in the

of the world into contact with

Midwest and the West (as well as those in

to anthropology by the time he arrived at the

each other and with Americans.

Japan), show the same shifts in collection

American Museum in 1889, and soon after

inventories, presumably reflecting the historical

joining the University of Chicago he began

process described above (Deriha 1997). This

fieldwork among native peoples in Mexico in

In this unusually candid snapshot
by Jesse Tarbox Beals, Sangtukno,
an Ainu woman, shares a moment
with Lorenza, a Patagonian, and

shift is documented directly in the field notes of

1894,- he continued to travel to Mexico

her dog. (NAA 98-10286)

Frederick Starr, to which we now turn.

almost every year until 1903.

18.5

18.6 A Live-in Exposition
While at the fair the Ainu lived on
the grounds and demonstrated
traditional customs, arts, and
technology, as seen in this photo¬

Frederick Starr and the Ainu

Late in 1903, Starr was approached by

Frederick W. Starr (1858-1933) is known in

William J. McGee (1853-1912), who had

Japan as O-juda no Hakase, or "Dr. Votive

been put in charge of the anthropology

Seals," because he was a master collector of

exhibit plans for the proposed Louisiana

votive seals, which are usually dedicated to

Purchase Centennial Exposition (the so-

and Making Baskets” by Jesse

Buddhist temples and Shinto shrines,- Starr

called St. Louis Exposition) to be held in

Tarbox Beals. “Living” exhibits had

seems to have become fascinated with them

1904 in St. Louis, Missouri (VanStone 1993).

while living in Japan in 1909 and 1910. His

Following the advice of Franz Boas and

contributions to Ainu studies and Ainu

anthropologists from the Smithsonian's

graph titled “Ainu Men Carving

been presented in Europe since
the 1880s. The concept was car¬
ried to America for the 1893

museum collections are little known in either

Bureau of American Ethnology, the commit¬

the Smithsonian’s Folklife Festival

Japan or North America, but the Ainu

tee developed a plan that involved "living"

on the Mall. (NAA 98-10292)

Collection Documentation Project (1990-96)

exhibits of native peoples. Twelve groups

has revealed clearly that he was one of the

were invited to participate, including the

most important collectors of Ainu specimens

Ainu: Starr's task was to find an Ainu group

in North America.

who could demonstrate how to make tools

World Columbian Exposition and

Frederick Starr was born in Auburn,
New York, in 1858. His schooling included
graduation from Lafayette College, in Easton,
Pennsylvania, in 1882, and a Ph.D. from
18/NORTH AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

for daily use and build an Ainu house to live
in on the exhibition grounds.
Before leaving for Japan, Starr corre¬
sponded with those who had previously

141

collected Ainu materials, including Edward S.

1993). During the recruitment effort he

Morse, Romyn Hitchcock, and E. Odium. He

acquired about 240 Ainu specimens from

sought—in vain—their suggestions on villages

villages including Piratori, Nibutani,

where collecting might be possible. McGee and

Porosaru, and Okotsonai,- he also acquired

Boas were also consulted as well as Japanese

two houses in Shiraoi, which was close to the

embassy and consular officials, and the Japan

railroad between Sapporo and Muroran.

Ministry of Commerce was petitioned for

In late March 1904, Starr and the group

assistance with travel and for shipping dis¬

of nine Ainu and a translator left Yokohama

mantled Ainu houses and collections.

for St. Louis (fig. 18.3). Upon their arrival at

At that time, there were several anthro¬

the exposition grounds, a single Ainu house

pologists and linguists in Japan who were

was assembled using materials from two

interested in Ainu studies. Starr became

houses that had been shipped from Japan.

acquainted with the publications of Basil Hall

Nine Ainu people lived in the house and

Chamberlain (1850-1935,- see Chamberlain

performed—as did other native groups from

1887a, b), professor at the Faculty of Letters,

other regions of the world—demonstrating

and Shogoro Tsuboi (1 863-191 3), professor

tool-making and daily activities (figs. 18.4-

of Anthropology at the Faculty of Sciences,

1 8.7) for visitors to the fair (Breitbart 1997).

both at the Tokyo Imperial University. He

At the end of the exposition Starr was

also consulted the publications on Ainu

awarded a gold medal for a superb exhibition.

culture and folklore written by Rev. John
Batchelor (see Batchelor 1889, 1901).

After carrying out fieldwork in West
Africa and the Philippines from 1905 to 1908,
Starr returned to Japan for the academic year

18.7 Goodwill Ambassadors

1909-10,- he continued to pursue his various

Perhaps more than their parents, Ainu

interests, including collecting votive seals and

youngsters Kiko (“Gold”) and Kehttle

taking photographs and films. In January

(“Chrysanthemum”) were on display in

1910 he traveled to eastern Hokkaido to

St. Louis. While their parents were re¬
quired to work at their demonstrations,

photograph fox- and bear-sending ceremonies

the children effectively used their

in the village of Nemuro, west of Obihiro,

charms to bridge the cultural gap be¬

and in March he arrived in Piratori on the

tween the Ainu and Americans, as this

Saru River to revisit the Ainu who had come

photograph by Jesse Tarbox Beals re¬

to St. Louis. He was surprised at the advance

veals. (NAA 98-10280)

of Japanization after only a six-year absence.
On these two visits, Starr collected eighty
additional Ainu pieces.
In the fall of 1911, after concluding
fieldwork in Mexico, Starr undertook a tour to
the Korean peninsula,- on his way back to
Chicago, he stopped in Tokyo early in
December. In Tokyo Jenichiro Oyabe (18671941), formerly an educator of Ainu youth and
Hiram M. Hiller's guide, offered to sell Starr
With his personal assistant, Manuel
Gonzales, Starr left Chicago in late January

most probably from the Volcano Bay area,- he

1904, landing at Yokohama early in February.

also offered Ainu-e (illustrations of Ainu life and

After making arrangements with government

customs), books about the Ainu, and lantern

officials and visiting the anthropology

slides. After some negotiation, Starr purchased

department at Tokyo Imperial LIniversity,

the entire artifact collection and some of the

Starr traveled to Hokkaido by train and, with

books, but he did not want the slides. (These

the guidance of Batchelor, visited such Saru

were passed on to Oyabe's descendants and

River Ainu villages as Penakori, Porosaru,

were recently donated by his grandchildren to

Osatonai, and Okotsonai, all of which were

the Historical Museum of Hokkaido, Sapporo

upstream from the modern Ainu village of

[Deriha 1995]). From then until he retired
from the LIniversity of Chicago in 1923, Starr

Nibutani and no longer exist.

14 2

his entire Ainu collection of about 230 pieces,

With Batchelor's assistance, Starr

continued his travels to Mexico, West Africa,

succeeded in recruiting nine Ainu for the St.

China, Japan, and Korea, but he apparently

Louis Exposition (Starr 1904,- VanStone

never visited the Ainu again.

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / Y.

KOTANI

Museum of Art (figs. 18.8, 18.9), and about
seventy are at the Logan Museum of Anthro¬
pology at Beloit College.
Of the 320 pieces at Brooklyn, 240
were secured in February and March 1904,
when John Batchelor took Starr to the Saru
River villages of Piratori, Nibutani, Penakori,
Porosaru, Osatonai, and Okotsonai. Upon
their arrival in a village, Batchelor would
announce Starr's interest in purchasing
objects,- soon individuals would appear
carrying objects they wished to sell. Starr
was interested in buying a wide range of
daily utensils and was careful not to purchase
duplicates. Then, in December 1911 he
purchased Jenichiro Oyabe's collection.
In 1912 Frederick Starr entered into
discussions about the purchase of his Ainu
collection with Stewart Culin at the Brook¬
lyn Institute of Arts and Sciences. Starr asked
Culin to purchase the entire collection, but
Culin did not have sufficient funds (which
were being provided by a patron named
Herman Stutzer), so Starr decided to sell the
material he had collected in 1904 to the
institution and keep the Oyabe collection
until a later date. In 1913 and 1914 Starr
made arrangements with Charles E. Brown of
the State Historical Society of Wisconsin in
Madison for sale of the remaining Ainu
material, which it kept until I960,- at that
18.8 Starr’s Legacy
Many of the artifacts produced by the
Ainu in St. Louis were acquired by the

Our inventory records show that Starr

time the remaining sixty-seven artifacts were

visited Hokkaido three times: from February

transferred to the Logan Museum at Beloit

to March 1904,- in January of 1910,- and in

College. What became of the rest of the

March of 1910. During these visits he

Oyabe collection is unknown.

Field Museum of Natural History and
other institutions participating in the

Starr's archival materials include field

exposition. These beautiful ikupasuy

obtained many Ainu artifacts, which are now

(prayer sticks) with fishscale, weaving,

housed at the Brooklyn Museum of Art in

wave, and abstract eye designs were

New York and the Logan Museum of Anthro¬

1909-10 (nine books), and 191 I (one book),

pology, Beloit College, in Beloit, Wisconsin.

as well as correspondence, newspaper

collected by Starr, who visited the
Ainu in 1904 and 1910. Much of his

notes for the years 1904 (three books),

In addition to Starr's artifact collections, we

clippings, and other manuscripts, all of

by the Brooklyn Museum of Art. (BMA

have located other materials on Ainu culture

which are stored at the Regenstein Library at

12.315, 12.331, 12.323, 12.250)

assembled by him at the LIniversity of

the LIniversity of Chicago.

private collection was later purchased

Chicago Library and at the LIniversity of

Starr's notes give precise information on

Oregon Library and Art Museum We found

the names of Ainu artifacts collected, village

that these collections and archival materials

names, and even the prices he paid to village

are largely unknown and untouched: North

people,- he also listed books he bought,

American anthropologists apparently have

ethnographic specimens purchased, photo¬

never tried to reconstruct exactly what Starr

graphs and films taken, and other informa¬

did among (and for) the Ainu (Evans 1991).

tion. These data permit a fairly complete

Frederick Starr's Ainu collections

picture of his field experience to emerge

(Kotani 1994) can be classified into the

(although the artifact tallies do not always

following categories: ethnographic collec¬

match today's museum inventories). He notes,

tions, archival documents, Ainu-e illustrations,

for instance, that most of the Ainu houses in

and photographic materials. Starr's ethno¬

these villages, particularly in Piratori, were of

graphic collections are in two locations: about

Ainu type and had their interiors arranged in

320 specimens are held by the Brooklyn

Ainu fashion, he also mentions that there

18/NORTH

AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

143

18.9

Ainu Robe

As Japanese cotton became
more affordable, garments
known as chikarkarpe, mean¬
ing “our embroidered thing,"
were developed by substitut¬
ing cotton for attush (elm-bark
cloth); Ainu often used old
Japanese kimonos or yukata
for the base fabric. The use of
dark strips around the neck,
front opening, sleeves, and
hem of a garment was re¬
tained, but embroidery be¬
came more complex. The aes¬
thetics of combining the base
garment pattern with the em¬
broidery created an unending
challenge for the innovative
Ainu textile artist. This robe
was collected by Frederick
Starr in Porosaru in 1904.
(BMA 12.582)

144

18/NORTH

AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

145

were very few Japanese-style houses in 1904.

such as Takeshiro Matsuura, a famous geogra¬

Six years later, in March 1910, he expresses

pher and explorer of Hokkaido and the Ainu

surprise at finding that almost all the Ainu-

during the late Tokugawa period, photo¬

style houses were gone and that Japanese-type

graphs of him, his books, and even his

houses dominated the village. The fact that

tombstone are represented.

Starr purchased many of his early collections

A final category of Starr archival

from Penakori, Porusaru, Osatonai, and

resources relates to books and films, many of

Okotsonai, which were later abandoned,

which are mentioned in his field notes but

provides information about social and cultural

have never been located. Starr wrote in his

change at the end of the Meiji period.

diaries that while staying and traveling in

The most interesting unpublished

Japan, he purchased old Japanese books

manuscript is Starr's "Ainu Notes," a 120-page

describing the Ainu and their way of life,-

excerpt from his 1904 and 1909-10 field notes,

some of these are now considered to be

supplemented by materials published by John

classics in Ainu studies. He also described

Batchelor and others. Topic headings include:

taking black-and-white motion pictures,

Nemuro (town), Tokachi Ainu (dialect), Ainu

specifically of Ainu ceremonies and village

Pictures (Ainu-e), Salutation, Fetish, Outhouses,

scenes at the villages of Nemuro and Piratori

Saru River Towns (itinerary), Mats, Cutting,

during the winter of 1910, which would make

Movement of Ainu, and so forth,- the notes

them the earliest film records ever made of

appear to have been selected in 1911 or 1912

the Ainu (if they are found).

for an intended monograph. Among his papers
is another manuscript of twenty-one pages on

Inventory Projects

the Kurile Ainu of North and South Chishima,

During the past fifteen years systematic efforts

probably written at Starr's request by Ryuzo

to inventory Ainu collections and archival

Torii, a colleague of Shogoro Tsuboi at Tokyo

materials in Europe and North America have

Imperial University.

resulted in identifying a world corpus of more

The Museum of Art at the University of

archival and photographic materials that

have been collected by Frederick Starr,

document changing Ainu culture from about

although there is no mention of them in his

1850. The collections formed at the earliest date

field notes. These Ainu-e are good pictorial

are found in the museums of Europe, closely

sources of information about how the

followed by those of eastern, and later western,

Japanese understood the Ainu (Sasaki 1993b

North America. These collections, inspired by

and this volume). Compared to the European

the "discovery" of a remote and seemingly non-

collections, the number of Ainu-e in North

Mongolian population in northern Japan and

America is rather small.

Sakhalin, were facilitated by the opening of

As part of his field documentation, Starr

146

than 12,000 Ainu artifacts and additional

Oregon has ten pieces of Ainu-e thought to

Japan with the beginning of the Meiji era in

took photographs and lantern slides during

1868. Western museum collectors and anthro¬

his work in FJokkaido: to date about one

pologists mshed into Hokkaido and Sakhalin to

hundred slides and pictures have been found

assemble collections, and during the next thirty

at the University of Chicago, as well as at the

years they brought Ainu artifacts and Ainu

University of Oregon Library in the Gertrude

people to millions of museum-goers and world's

Bass Warner Collection,- the latter includes

fair visitors in Europe and North America. Ainu

slides taken by Starr or his assistant in 1904 in

artifacts were as striking to the Western public

Tokyo, Yokohama, and FJokkaido, several of

as were Ainu people themselves, and many

which were used as illustrations in his St.

museums sought to build collections of the

Louis Exposition book (Starr 1904,- VanStone

material culture of this intriguing, newly

1993). A second group of slides dates from

discovered people. However, as the mania

1912 when Starr visited Nemuro and Piratori,

passed, political changes occurred and world

and these include documentation of fox¬

wars raged,- as Ainu people were increasingly

sending and bear-sending ceremonies in

pressed into the mainstream of Japanese society

Nemuro. A third group includes postcards and

by a Japanese policy of assimilation, scholarly

slides purchased commercially in 1904 and

interest waned, and many Ainu collections in

1909-10 in Muroran, Sapporo, Tokyo, and

Europe and North America fell victim to public

Yokohama. The last group included things or

disinterest and curatorial neglect. Not until the

Japanese people closely related to Ainu studies,

1980s did these collections again attract

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / Y.

KOTANI

interest, partly because of the revival of Ainu

Starr's career may be representative of

culture itself, which lead to a revival of scholarly

the attitude of other western anthropologists

interest in Ainu material culture, language, and

and museum curators as they drifted away

traditions.

from Ainu studies after 1915. Like Oyabe,

A partial inventory of North American

who told Starr that he had already fulfilled

materials that has now been assembled

his share of work for the Ainu and their

provides a rough approximation of about 3,200

welfare, Starr seems to have become disen¬

objects and archival materials in museums that,

chanted by the changes in Ainu culture

until recently, had little if any interest in them.

resulting from the growing Japanese influ¬

Frederick Starr's collections are emblematic of

ence over their lives, and he eventually

the best of these collections, having been

moved on to other work, even selling his

assembled with a systematic anthropological

Ainu collection to different institutions.

approach during the first decade of the

Perhaps more importantly, the Ainu were

twentieth century. This material—as well as

becoming less enigmatic to westerners as

the other major collections in North

they became "more Japanese" and interest in

America—provides a resource that becomes

them as "exotic" people waned.

more valuable year by year because of its

Today's anthropologists and art

scope, its early dates, and its documentation.

historians find new interest in Ainu collec¬

In contrast to the early Ainu collections

tions. Through careful inventories, scholars

mentioned above, those obtained after World

have begun to reconstruct the Ainu material

War I are few,- exceptions are those of Ryuzo

and documentary record from museums and

Torii (1910-1920s, National Museum of

archives. This work is also proving to be of

Ethnology, Osaka,- Sasaki 1993a), Neil Munro

use to the Ainu people themselves and to a

(1930s, British Museum), Fosco Maraini (1940s,

public that has never ceased being curious

Museo Nationale di Antropologia e Etnologia,

about the Ainu people, their past, and their

Florence,- Maraini 1942), and Kirsten Refsing

future. A global cultural-resource inventory

(1970s, Aarhus, Denmark,- Refsing 1974).

of Ainu materials will do much to encourage

Generally speaking, Ainu collections in Japan

Ainu studies of the future.

were not assembled until after 1930, when
Keizo Shibusawa, Sakuzaemon Kodama, Masao

The author thanks the sponsors of these Ainu

Oka, and others realized their importance.

documentation projects, which were supported by

Systematic collecting by Japanese museums

Grants-in-Aid for Overseas Scientific Research

]

came even later, around 1950, by which time

[Grant Nos. 0204 4038 and 06041047 from the

traditional Ainu culture and society had changed

Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, and Sports of

and collecting directly from the Ainu people

Japan, and Japanese, American, and European

was nearly impossible.

colleagues who participated in this work.

18/NORTH

AMERICAN COLLECTIONS

14 7

A
Romyn
Hitchcock and
the
Smithsonian
Ainu
Collection
Chang-su Houchins

FATEFUL 1886 VISIT TO JAPAN BY

from Columbia University's School of Engi¬

Romyn Hitchcock (1851-1923)

neering and Applied Science in New York

led to his becoming, by sheer

City, he was appointed Assistant Professor of

chance, an instant ethnologist

Chemistry at Lehigh Llniversity in Bethlehem,

and an early explorer of Hokkaido in 1888.

Pennsylvania. Later he taught chemistry and

On behalf of the Smithsonian Institution,

toxicology in the Chicago Homeopathic

he assembled its most comprehensive Ainu

Medical College (National Cyclopaedia 1926).

ethnographic collection, which remains the

Hitchcock's connection with the

nucleus of the Smithsonian Ainu holdings.

Smithsonian began in 1883 when he became

The Hitchcock Collection comprises

Acting Curator in the Division of Textiles of

177 ethnographic specimens (mostly from the

the Department of Arts and Industries. Soon

Hokkaido Ainu but also including seventeen

after his arrival in Washington, he became

Sakhalin Ainu specimens obtained through an

involved in preparation of textile exhibits for

exchange with Sapporo Agricultural College)

the World's Industrial and Cotton Centennial

and photographic records of places and

Exposition in New Orleans in 1884-85, and

people representing Ainu life, in addition to

later he joined the curatorial staff of the

copious field notes. The notes, entitled

Division of Textiles at the Smithsonian's new

"Betsukai to Shari," "Yambetsu to Kushiro

United States National Museum, which had

Iwosan," and "Kushiro to Horoidzumi" are

just been organized in 1881.

included in the Hitchcock Papers (manuscript

In March of 1886, the Honorable

no. 2174) now held at Cornell University

Minister Kuki Ryuichi (1852-193 1) of the

Libraries, Ithaca, New York, in the Depart¬

Japanese Legation in Washington, D C.,

ment of Manuscripts and University Archives.

wrote to Spencer Fullerton Baird, Secretary of

19.1a, b Ainu Man and Woman of Urap

Romyn Hitchcock visited the Kuriles
and Hokkaido while conducting ethno¬
graphic research for the Smithsonian
in 1888 and wrote extensive reports
on his observations. He saw his role
as recording and collecting from a "dy¬
ing” culture that had lost out in compe¬
tition with the Japanese. He found the
Ainu to be a hospitable people and
praised their religion and rituals. (NAA
98-10384, 98-10373)

i 48

Like many early museum collectors and

the Smithsonian, asking him to recommend

curators, Hitchcock's background did not lead

someone who might be interested in becom¬

him to museum work naturally. Museums in the

ing an English instructor at Dai-san Koto

late nineteenth century were still youthful

Chu-gakko, a new public high school in

institutions, and scientific curiosity and

Osaka established to train national leaders

apprenticeship played a stronger role than

(the school was later moved to Kyoto in 1 889

formal education in contributions to the

and in 1949 merged with Kyoto University)

formative field of museum science. Hitchcock

(Sanko Dosokei 1980: 221). Hitchcock

studied chemistry at Cornell Llniversity, where

realized that a residence in Japan might

in his freshman year he won first prize for the

provide an interesting opportunity to make

most rapid progress in chemical work. In 1872,

ethnographic observations and collections

upon receiving a Bachelor of Science degree

about Japan and its native Ainu people, and

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/C. HOUCHINS

19.3 Ikupasuy
Unlike many later collectors, Hitchcock
did not obtain many prayer sticks

(ikupasuy); his collection contains only

he applied immediately (Hitchcock letter of

Hakodate, Hokkaido, and was about to

8 March 1886 to Spencer Fullerton Baird,

realize his goal.

Smithsonian Archives RU 30). In April, he

In the course of approximately one

received approval from Baird for a two-year

month—from August 10 when he left

ever: “They were highly valued by their

furlough and departed for Japan, arriving in

Nemuro until September 1 when he arrived in

possessors who probably would not

Yokohama in early September. Barely six

Hiroo—Hitchcock traveled eight hundred

months after Hitchcock and his wife settled

miles along the eastern seacoast of Hokkaido

in Osaka, he wrote about the lonely and

on horseback and on foot. As he was leaving

six. It was not for lack of trying, how¬

have parted with them but in consider¬
ation of a reward of sake in addition
to the price demanded" (Hitchcock

disenchanted life they led there in a letter to

Betsukai by a sandy road along the seashore,

Baird's assistant, George Brown Goode (4

at the beginning of his journey alone in the

Stick.” This piece was collected in

March 1887 to G. Brown Goode: Smith¬

wilderness, he wrote: "I had already read and

Etorofu, Kuriles, in 1888. Compared

sonian Archives RU 201). Observing that he

seen enough of Hokkaido to fully understand

found Japan's new westernization process

that Yezo is not Japan. It is apart by itself. A

disturbing to observe, he commented, "I wish

rough, uncultivated island . . ." (Hitchcock

1891a: 458). For his efforts, the Ainu
began calling him “Mr. Mustache

to others of its type it has a rather
simple central design (noshki) consist¬
ing of a double scroll motif; the marks

1891a: 432). By this time Hitchcock had

(itokpa) at either end identify the

become familiar with the English-language

owner. (NMNH 150698)

reports on the Ainu written by J. W.
Blakestone, Edward Sylvester Morse, B. H.
Chamberlain, John Milne, T. M. Dixon,
Henry S. Monroe, John Batchelor, and others.
The traveler had already purchased a
saddle in Osaka and a horse in Nemuro. His
outfit "consisted of camera, tripod, extra
19.2 Two Ainu Men

plates, sleeping clothes, a sheet sewed up like

Hitchcock’s photographs are unusual

a bag to keep off fleas, a mosquito net, a red

in providing an unreconstructed view

blanket, changes of clothing, water-proof

of the Ainu, shot as he found them,

sheet, rubber overcoat, toilet articles, a flask

without stage sets and ceremonial

of brandy, and a few articles of food to be

costumes. This shot taken in north¬

used at a distance from hotels" (ibid.).

east Hokkaido shows two generations
of Ainu men in everyday attush cloth¬

Hitchcock added to his outfit a bag for

ing. The younger man has a boister¬

stationery, a revolver, compass, thermometer,

ously infectious smile as unruly as his

barometer, and a bottle for water to attach to

curly hair. Such spirit is rarely seen in

his saddle (Hitchcock Papers no. 2174).

field photographs of the Ainu. Less

Hitchcock, in his first visit to an Ainu

appealing is the pose of the older

house at Shibetsu, describes an old gray-

man, who seems to have been asked
to hold his robe open to reveal his

bearded man whom he thought "looked like

hairy leg. The practice of documenting

a patriarch, benignant, wise and gentle¬

Ainu physical form, which seems irrel¬

manly." He noted that the old man lived in a

evant and distasteful today, was a

clean house. At another house, he saw an old

standard scientific practice one hun¬

woman. "As soon as 1 entered, she covered

dred years ago. (NAA 28377)

her face and began to weep and sob. It was
to go to Yezo ... to get a photographic

not a satisfactoiy visit" (Hitchcock Papers

record and items of daily use. I believe the

no. 2174).

Ainu [to be] scarcely touched by our

The first communication sent by

civilization and fast dying out." Hitchcock

Hitchcock from Hokkaido to the Smith¬

continued to press for support for his field

sonian was from Rubetsu (now called

study and eventually received tepid approval

Shibetsu) (Honda 1995: 97), which reads:

from Goode on June 5, 1888, together with a

"My Dear Mr. Goode, Rubetsu is not on the

cable for $250,- by July 24 he arrived in

map. It's not a town, as I supposed it was this

19/HITCHCOCK AND THE SMITHSONIAN

149

Collecting began in Shari sometime
after August 17, on which date Hitchcock left
Rubetsu (fig. 19.3). His first purchases in
Shari were four "moustache" (prayer) sticks
(USNM catalog no. 150, 695-99). According
to Hitchcock's recollection, the price quoted
by the Ainu owner was rather high, despite
the present of sake he offered, nevertheless,
he acquired them because of the finely carved
decoration and good-quality lacquer finish
(Hitchcock Papers no. 2174). Three of these
"moustache" sticks were published in the
United States National Museum Annual Report for
1889-1890 (hereafter USNM-AR 1889-90),

and the accompanying notation regarding
their use reads: "Used to make libations of
sake to the gods, and also to raise the
moustache while drinking sake" (Hitchcock
19.4, 19.5

Cherry-bark and Wooden

Bowls

Hitchcock had been instructed to obtain
a sample of objects actually being
used, whether or not they were attractive.
He coliected a set of simple birchbark

morning—only a place. It consists of a most

1891a: 459, 493, fig. 77). This description

miserable Jap. hotel and one house, with a

indicates his awareness of the ceremonial

shed for horses. You will readily infer that I

function of these objects, which previous

am on my journey in Yezo. I am indeed quite

writers had generally relegated to a class of

in the interior, miles away from another

ethnographic curiosities as "mustache sticks."

containers (yarnima) from Piratori as

house, among almost unexplored mountains

Hitchcock continued his collecting

well as more stylish objects like this

. . . I have a long and trying journey before

activities throughout his lonely and hazardous

octagonal wooden bowl (nima) from

me ... I intend to have some knowledge of

journey,- sometimes he was lost in the woods,

the ainos." The letter continues with a

and other times he lost shoes traversing swamps

Bekkai. Bark containers were made from
pliable bark that was soaked in hot water

description of his small six-mat hotel room

in the rain. Nevertheless, he assembled an

were reinforced with thin wood strips.

and the kind of food he ate in order to stave

impressive number of artifacts relating to all

In anthropological collecting, use and

off hunger. He ended the letter with the

aspects of Ainu life (figs. 19.4—19.9). In addition

function were as important as the object

sentence: "It is cold here" (Hitchcock letter to

to collecting ethnographic specimens, he

Goode, August 16, 1888, Smithsonian

searched for remnants of the so-called

Archives RU 201).

koropok-cjuru, the cave-dwelling savages

and shaped into bowls whose rims

itself, and a clean object was not always
as informative as a used or dirty one.
The attractive wooden bowl was col¬
lected right off the table and still has
fishscales adhering to it. (NMNH
150721A, 150685)

150

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/C. HOUCHINS

19.6b

19.6a

19.6a, b, 19.7

Raw Materials

Hitchcock and other anthropological

theorized to be the pre-Ainu inhabitants of

accessions: "Mr. Romyn Hitchcock, return¬

Hokkaido (Tsuboi 1887). Hitchcock's work

ing from japan, after a two years' sojourn

debunked these folk theories and his excava¬

[actually three years], has enriched the

tions at ancient pithouse village sites produced

ethnographic series with many most desir¬

one of the earliest scientific reports on

able specimens gathered on the spot with the

Hokkaido archeology (Hitchcock 1891b),- his

view of illustrating the life of the people....

collections, held at the Smithsonian's National

Mr. Hitchcock spent much time among the

Museum of Natural History along with his

Ainos, utilizing his talent as an artist to add

ethnological materials, continue to be of

value to his material secured by means of

interest to specialists in Japanese archaeology.

many pictures" (USNM-AR 1889-90: 127).

Upon his return to Washington in

Hitchcock's articles, "The Ancient Pit-

1890, he noted in a document titled "Report

Dwellers of Yezo" and "The Ainos of Yezo,

for the Month of May" that "the catalogue

Japan" (1891a, b), demonstrate his passion

processes. Their collections included

cards of all the Japanese and Aino ethnologic

for learning and show the range of items he

such materials as a raw salmon skin

material collected by me were transferred to

obtained in his search to understand the

and the stretchers used to dry them

Prof. Mason early in the month" (Smith¬

Ainu, including their racial type and their

prior to making boots and mitts, and

sonian Archives, RU 158). Professor Otis T.

lifeways. The Cornell University collection

collectors were diligent in obtaining
materials illustrating technological

bundles of ohyo fiber, processed from

Mason (1838-1908) was then in charge of

of Hitchcock's papers includes a section

the newly established Department of

entitled "Lectures on Ainos of Yezo," presum¬

clothing. (NMNH E150725, BMA

Ethnology. The USNM-AR 1889-90 lists the

ably delivered upon return from his journey

12.495, NMNH 150653)

Hitchcock Collection as one of its principal

in Hokkaido, which reveals the collector's

the inner bark of the elm tree, from
which attush fabric was woven for

frustration: "Who are the Ainos? It will not
suffice to say that they are a peculiar race of
people with long hair and beards inhabiting
Yezo and the southern part of Sagharin [Sa¬
khalin]. We wish to know where they be¬
long. But these questions are still unan¬
swered. The Ainos are an ethnological mys¬
tery. ..." (Hitchcock Papers no. 2174).
In an attempt to solve this mystery, in
addition to his article about the pit-dwellers,
Hitchcock presented his Ainu ethnographic
collection catalog with numerous illustra¬
tions in the USNM-AR 1889-90 (fig. 19.1 1).
In the catalog, he first declared the Ainu to
19 /HITCHCOCK AND THE SMITHSONIAN

151

19.8, 19.9

Attush Robe

and Leggings

In addition to obtaining unproc¬
essed ohyo (elm-bark fiber),
skeins of dyed ohyo, and the
backstrap looms used to weave
it into attush, Hitchcock collected
a series of attush garments. This
woman's robe was collected at
Tsuishikari near Sapporo, and
the leggings from Abashiri.
Golden-colored attush garments
provided ideal backgrounds for
contrasting Ainu embroidery. Styl¬
ish, yet light and durable, attush
garments were worn by Ainu in
Hokkaido, the Kuriles, and Sa¬
khalin. Even Japanese seamen,
fishermen, and farmers working
in Hokkaido and northern
Honshu sometimes preferred

attush for work clothes. (NMNH
150780, 150649)

152

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS /C. HOUCHINS

be a "peculiar race," then he categorized the
material he collected under various headings:
personal appearance and physical character¬
istics (based on photographs and measure¬
ments), clothing, dwellings, household
utensils and food, carrying burdens, mode of
greeting, marriage customs, burial customs,
punishments, hunting and fishing, religion,
the bear cults and feast—all typical catego¬
ries of late nineteenth-century museum
cultural classification.
Furthermore, Hitchcock prepared an
Ainu exhibit for installation in the museum
(fig. 19.10). A wooden model of an Ainu
house and a model of a pit-dwelling were
displayed in one case, while another case
featured an Ainu male mannequin created
from one of Hitchcock's photographs. The
Evening Star of March 15, 1890 carried an ar¬
ticle about the Ainu exhibit with the subtitle:
"A Queer People. They live in the Kuriles
and Northern Japan" (fig. 1.14). The article
19.11

describes the hairy, barefoot, robust man

Carved Plates

Hitchcock wrote two long articles on

wearing a coarsely woven robe and using

his Ainu studies and published them

simple, undecorated daily articles indicative

in United States National Museum

of Ainu culture, which was described as be¬

Annual Report for 1889-1890, one

ing barely a step above savagery. In 1920 this

year before John Batchelor's The

Ainu of Japan appeared (1892). Both

Ainu exhibit was replaced by a larger one

are still invaluable sources on tradi¬

entitled "Aino Man and Woman": the figures,

tional Ainu culture. This illustration

wearing ceremonial dress, were accompanied

appeared as fig. 74 in Hitchcock’s

by a loom, other items of dress, and house¬

report with comments on the beauty

hold materials.

and skill demonstrated by Ainu carv¬

By this time the curatorial viewpoint

ers, who used designs similar to

had changed, and the Ainu were no longer

those made by women on clothing.

19/HITCHCOCK AND THE SMITHSONIAN

153

North American museums, lay dormant after
the mystique of the "mysterious Ainu" had
passed, and American anthropologists turned
increasingly to exploring their own native
cultures,- even now there are few Ainu
specialists in the Americas.
Throughout the twentieth century
Hitchcock's collection and ethnographic
notes were virtually unknown to all but a few
scholars in Japan. Of course, they were also
unknown to the Ainu, who had no access to
this information until his report was trans¬
lated in 1985 by Yasuo Kitagamae, a Japanese
archaeologist, who published it in Japanese
under the title Ainujin to sono bunka.- Meiji chuki
no Ainu no murakara (The Ainu and Their
Culture: Ainu Villages in the Mid-Meiji
Period) (Kitagamae 1985). Recently, this
author completed a major survey of the
Hitchcock accession notes and collection
documentation in collaboration with an
inventory of the collection conducted by
Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka in the early 1990s. This
work was followed by an expanded Ainu
collection-inventory project organized by
19.10 a, b

Ainu Exhibits

Shortly after returning to Washington,
Hitchcock prepared an Ainu exhibit in

portrayed as "barely above savagery" but

Yoshinobu Kotani and colleagues (Kotani

rather as dignified and cultured—though still

1993a, b, 1997, and this volume), that

exotic and mysterious—people.

resulted in a list of the major Ainu collec¬

the National Museum that included an
Ainu homestead model with a house, an
elevated storage shed, and a bear cage;

Hitchcock's association with the

tions in North American museums, includ¬

Smithsonian ended in I 892, but the legacy of

ing the Hitchcock Collection. Finally, build¬

another case featured an Ainu male

his scientific work lives on. His "Ainos of

ing on the Kotani inventory, the Japanese

mannequin based on one of Hitchcock's

Yezo, Japan" (1891b) was the most compre¬

television company, NHK (Sapporo) in 1996

photographs. The Evening Star of 15

hensive early ethnographic report on the Ainu

produced a high-quality CD-ROM of se¬

and, although suffering from the bias of

lected Ainu pieces that included many

People. They live in the Kuriles and

"primitivism" common to most early ethnol¬

specimens from the Smithsonian's

Northern Japan."

ogy, is the only detailed ethnographic report

Hitchcock Collection. As a result of these

produced during the nineteenth century that

efforts and public exhibitions now under¬

March 1890 carried an article about the
exhibit with the subtitle; “A Queer

In 1920 this Ainu exhibit was re¬
placed by a new, larger case display
showing an Ainu man and woman as
part of its “Racial Groups and Figures"
series. Its caption read: “The Aino are

documents an early Ainu collection. The value

way, as well as growing interest among the

of Hitchcock's work has been recognized for

Ainu people themselves, Hitchcock's small

many years, but it received relatively little

but well-documented and published collec¬

an especially interesting tribe of unde¬

attention until scholarly interest in Ainu culture

tion is receiving belated recognition as one

termined relationship, but are thought

gradually expanded after the 1980s. His

of the most important early Ainu ethno¬

to show traces of Aryan blood. They are

collection, like most other Ainu collections in

graphic collections.

of short stature, very strong and ac¬
tive. The women tattoo a mustache-like
figure around the mouth. Their art is
that of peoples of western Asia, a type
of which would be that of the Amur
tribes. They subsist by hunting and fish¬
ing." (NAA 88-8756)

154

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS /C. HOUCHINS

A
20/Batchelor,
Starr, and
Culin:
The Brooklyn
Museum of Art
Collection
Amy Poster

RECENT INVENTORY OF AlNU COLLEC-

gained some ability in the Chinese language

tions in North American museums

from his association with Philadelphia's

reveals that more than 3,000

Chinese community, he became a founding

objects have been located and

member of the Oriental Club of Philadel¬

documented in more than thirty different

phia,- he also belonged to several other

institutions (Kotani 1993a, b). Of these, the

professional institutions in his quest to study

Ainu collection of the Brooklyn Museum of Art

Asian culture and folklore. Between 1890 and

is the most extensive, consisting of approxi¬

1903, he served as Director and Curator of

mately 1,100 objects, including artifacts, Ainu-e

General Ethnology at the recently established

paintings, photographs, and manuscript

University of Pennsylvania Museum, positions

materials. The size of this collection, its

that allowed him to demonstrate and refine

provenance from three collectors working in

his abilities in ethnological collecting and

one location-—the Sam River valley—in

museum exhibition.

southern Hokkaido during the first decade of

It was during Culin's tenure at the

the twentieth century, and the quality and

Brooklyn Museum from 1903 to 1929 that the

breadth of materials make it one of the most

core of the museum's present African, Asian,

important Ainu collections in the world.

The Brooklyn Institute of Arts and

Oceanic, and Native American collections
were accumulated (Fane et al. 1991). Culin saw

Sciences—the forerunner of the Brooklyn

his mission as an ethnologist to document and

Museum of Art and itself a scion of institutions

collect from vanishing ethnic cultures, which

whose origins began in 1823—was created in

he and many other ethnologists of his day
believed would completely vanish
under the social, political, and
technological revolutions underway
at the turn of the century. Culin
organized several expeditions to
secure Native American objects for
the Brooklyn Museum. After
returning from his first North
American collecting trip in 1900,
Culin stated: "If our museums are
ever to have good collections of
Indian things they must waste no
time in setting out after them, for
none will be left ten years from now"
(Brooklyn Musem of Art Archives,
Culin Archival Collection, Record,
Activities Scrapbook, August 5,- see
Fane et al. 1991: 308, fn 31). In his
attempts to "save" Asian collections
from a similar fate, and of course to

20. 1

20. 2

build the Brooklyn Museum
collections, Culin made three

CliliW AND THE AiMU

1890 as an educational institution for the

expeditions to China, Japan, Korea, and India

In 1909 Stewart Culin, assisted by Togo

citizens of Brooklyn, then a prosperous city

during the years 1909 to 1914 (fig. 20.1).

Takayanagi, spent ten months collecting

with a population of more than 200,000. The

20.1, 20.2

ethnological materials in Japan for the

The Brooklyn Museum's Ainu collections

museum sought to provide a place where

were primarily formed from three different but

period he traveled for six weeks in the

people could learn the history of the world, a

related sources. In the summer of 1911 Culin

Kuriles and Hokkaido. His expedition

mission much broader than that of a museum

met Frederick Starr, a Chicago-based anthro¬

reports reveal interesting details about
his collecting program, prices paid, and

of art. The appointment in 1903 of Stewart

pologist and curator at the Field Museum, who

Culin as the museum's first Curator of Ethnol¬

organized the Ainu pavilion for the 1904 St.

ogy advanced this mission substantially.

Louis Exposition. Starr showed Culin about

Brooklyn Museum of Art. During this

reactions to the Ainu. In 1912 Culin re¬
turned to Japan and spent August and
September collecting in Hokkaido,

Culin was born in Philadelphia in 1858

250 Ainu artifacts (mostly from Piratori and

where this photograph of Ainu girls was

to a merchant family of Swedish descent.

other Sami River towns) that he had collected

taken by Count Carlo Arrivabene near

After graduating from a local academy, Culin

in 1904, 1910, and 1911, which he offered to

Hakodate. (BMA Archives)

became a self-taught ethnologist. Having

sell to the Brooklyn Museum for $750. The

20/ BMA: BATCHELOR, STARR, AND CULIN

155

collection impressed Culin as being "carefully
made and very representative," and from his
point of view, the price was right. Early the next
year about four hundred objects collected by
Starr arrived as a gift of a museum benefactor,
Herman Stutzer, under an arrangement that had
produced an additional 150 specimens. Later
that same year, more Ainu materials appeared as
a result of Culins 1912 expedition to Hokkaido.
Culin's expedition reports (1909, 1912,- fig.
20.3) are the primary sources of information
about his collecting activities (fig. 20.2). His
Ainu collections were acquired during August
and September of his 1912 expedition (this was
Culins second trip to Japan, following a tenmonth expedition in 1909, during which Culin
spent thirty-eight days in the Kurile Islands and
Hokkaido). While he also visited other areas of
Japan in 1912, his selection of a motif from an
Ainu robe for the cover image of his field report
suggests that his Ainu collections were the
highlight of the expedition.
Culin also procured the collection of
Rev. John Batchelor, the British missionary
who worked among the Ainu for more than
sixty years, from 1877 to 1940. Culin briefly
mentioned that when he stopped in Sapporo

20.3

in 1912, he insured the purchase of the Ainu
20.3, 20.4

objects from Batchelor's collection by giving

Snowshoes

and Deer Hunter

him a check for one hundred yen. Batchelor, a

Unlike arrows and other materi¬

well-known scholar of Ainu culture who

als that were no longer used

compiled the first Ainu Japanese-English

and were therefore easy to pur¬
chase, Culin found the Ainu un¬

dictionary (Batchelor 1889), helped both

willing to part with objects like

Starr and Culin in their acquisitions of Ainu

bentwood snowshoes, which

materials by providing them with valuable

they still needed for winter

advice and information about who to see,

hunting. These objects are il¬

what to purchase, and what price to pay. As

lustrated in this detail from an

Ainu-e drawing in Ainu Manners

Kotani has pointed out (1994), the Brooklyn

and Customs by Hokuyo

collections therefore document the material

Nishikawa, dating to the mid¬

culture and socioeconomic conditions of the

nineteenth century. Culin pur¬

Saru River and Hidaka provinces during the

chased these boots from John

from 1904 to 1912 as much as the interests of

Batchelor in 1912. (BMA

Starr, Culin, and Batchelor.

12.385; HML)

The objects in the Brooklyn Museum
Ainu collection reveal that household
materials were a principal focus of Culins
collection. These items held the most interest
for him because he was able to confirm that
the objects he was collecting—for instance, a
pot-hanger—were still used by the Ainu on a
daily basis. He wrote:
Here we entered a number of houses.
They were much alike, the interior
consisting of one room with highly
polished wooden floor, stained black with
smoke. In the first [house], near the

15<5

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / A. POSTER

entrance is the open fireplace from which
the smoke ascends to the roof. The water
kettle hangs over this from an iron or steel
rod, and there are usually several wellsmoked wooden pot hangers suspended
above (Culin 1912: 174).
Culin compared a pair of snowshoes
(figs. 20.3, 20.4) from an Ainu village near Lake
Harutori in Kushiro with ones he bought in
Shana, a village in the Kurile Islands: "1 stopped

in Shana in 1912, where he obtained
details on their construction from a
“half-blood” Ainu woman who sold
them to him. She said the soles were
of salmon; the uppers, salmon trout
trimmed with seal fur; and the cords,
plaited grass. Ainu fishskin boots
were waterproof and, when lined with

made a persistent effort, however, to try to find
objects of good quality among those items
abandoned by the Ainu. When he acquired a
pair of fishskin boots (fig. 20.5) in Shana, it
seems that he weighed values other than
their cost:

him clothes, dishes, bows and arrows, and

Gulin's notes show that he sometimes

except that the seal-skin thongs were reinforced
Fishskin Boots

doned their old costumes" (ibid.: 175). He

women, and even children, who all brought

snowshoes that hung outside. These were the
same construction as those 1 bought in Shana,

Culin purchased these fishskin boots

[Japanese] dress, they appeared to have aban¬

Last night the old inn-keeper brought me
a pair of salmon-skin boots made by the
half-blood Ainu woman at Shana. The
feet are made of the skin of the large
salmon [shake] and the legs of the skin of
the salmon trout (masu). The tops are of
seal fur and the cords of a plaited grass
called muri that grows on the hills. These
boots are filled with pounded rice straw
and are impervious to water and very
warm. They are used on the snow and ice
where they will wear for a long time, but
not on stones. The old man asked three
yen for them, much more 1 suppose than
their value here (ibid.: 135).

at one house and examined two pairs of

20.5

their costumes: "As I saw the Ainu in everyday

with cords and wire" (ibid.: 152). On the other
hand, there were apparently sufficient supplies
of old discarded things, such as old arrows,
which were easier to purchase because they
were no longer in daily use.
Typically, as when Culin arrived at a small
Japanese inn at Piratori, he was visited by a
group of old Ainu men and women, young

pounded rice straw, were very warm.
Such boots lasted a long time if one
used them only on snow and ice.

other things. Culin's view of the acculturation of

fell into a common pitfall of museum

(BMA 12.652)

Ainu society was projected in his comments on

collectors not conversant in the language of
the people they were collecting from. Such
collectors often worked with "third language"
interpreters from the dominant culture, in
this case, Japanese. He probably asked his
Japanese interpreter "what are those made
of?” and recorded the response, which was
provided in Japanese—shake and masu—
believing he had been given Ainu terms.
Gulin was also selective in his search for
bowls or carved trays, items commonly
carried by curio shops in neighboring towns
like Sapporo or even in port cities like
Yokohama, where antique dealers sometimes
stocked Ainu materials. He described
wooden trays sold at a curio store in Sapporo
as "the Japanese wooden trays with Ainu
patterns” which "are carved for the shop by
Ainu who come in from the mountains. They
are similar to the trays I saw at Nikko which
must have had an Ainu inspiration" (ibid.:
161). Here again, we may question Culin's
views, for without further documentation,
it seems unlikely that authentic Ainu
materials or even Ainu-inspired
materials could have been present
for sale at a Japanese religious
shrine like Nikko.
Culin also had a strong
interest in religious objects, and
this is reflected in the large

20.5

20/ BMA: BATCHELOR, STARR, ANDCLILIN

i 57

scabbards, in a corner of a house. Such
household displays of family heirlooms and
treasures were of special social and ritual
importance to Ainu families,- the treasures
demonstrated family wealth and providence
and were components of a family shrine.
Culin had several opportunities to
secure Japanese swords and sword scabbards
used by the Ainu, but he obviously did not
purchase them, for only one sword set exists
in the Brooklyn collection. At Piratori, Culin
saw swords in an Ainu house and noted: "It is
these things that have been offered to me in
such quantities. None of them have any
practical use nor artistic or pecuniary value"
(ibid.: 175). Among the other Japaneseproduced objects of little interest to Culin
was Japanese lacquerware: when an old
innkeeper at Shana offered to sell him a
lacquered box on four legs and a large rice
bowl, Culin recognized them as familiar
Japanese artifacts, and although they had
been used by Ainu, he did not buy them,
apparently wanting to collect only objects
that were of Ainu design or manufacture.
On the other hand, objects of curios¬
ity—such as the skull of an albatross and
other animal skulls used for divination or
protective purposes—were of interest to
Culin, who remarked on a group he found in
a curio store in Sapporo in 1912: "We next
visited another shop kept by an old man, a
20.6

Beaded Necklace

Culin purchased a number of old Ainu
necklaces from curio shops in Hokkaido.

number of ikupasuy (carved wooden prayer

kind of curio store. His stock consisted of

sticks) and inaw (sacred tufted sticks,- fig. 20.7)

worthless trifles, but included several Ainu

that appear in the Brooklyn collection. On his

trays which Mr. Batchelor told me were of

He observed that beaded necklaces

1912 trip he saw two inaw placed on both

good quality. 1 bought from him also two

along with treasured objects like

sides of the rectangular fireplace in an Ainu

skulls, one of a fox and the other of [illegible]

Japanese lacquered cups and boxes,

home in a village near Lake Harutori in

both tied with inao" (ibid.: 165).

swords, and other heirlooms along the

Kushiro (ibid.: 151),- these inaw were placed

Culin found imitation quiver models and

by the hearth out of respect for the goddess

blunt arrows, which were used for men's rituals

of the hearth and home.

and for the bear-sending ceremony, at a curio

and carved ikupasuy were displayed

treasure wall in Ainu homes. However,
this necklace came to the Brooklyn
Museum via Frederick Starr, who pur¬
chased it from the Ainu he brought

At the curio shop in the same village,

store in Sapporo that he visited with Batchelor.

to the St. Louis Exposition in 1904.

Culin bought a large necklace of glass beads

From Batchelor himself Culin acquired other

(BMA 12.447)

for 1.50 yen that is similar to others he

objects related to the bear-sending ceremony,

collected (fig. 20.6). At Shiraoi, a middle-aged

including a bear skull and claws, and men's

Ainu man brought him a number of necklaces

ceremonial headdresses.

whose beads looked new to Culin. Some glass

15 8

Culin's experience with Native American

heads were brought to the Ainu through trade

artifacts shows that he was a person who

with the Asian continent, but others were

sought to acquire those items that other

secretly made by the Matsumae clan at their

collectors disregarded or that were simply

headquarters in Hakodate. Culin's report (ibid.:

considered unobtainable. One such area

151) tells that at an Ainu house in the same

represented in the Ainu collection at Brooklyn

village, beaded necklaces and carved ikupasuy

is funerary objects. In the Ainu tradition, the

were displayed along with other treasured

deceased was laid out by a fireplace,- offerings

objects like Japanese lacquered cups, basins,

of food and drink were placed beside the body

and boxes, and a pile of old swords or sword

and the deceased was then dressed for burial.

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / A. POSTER

20.7

Ikupasuy

Like many early Western collectors and
anthropologists, Culin was fascinated

The burial costume consisted of cotton

own and secured two large and important

appliqued garments, mittens, and leggings, and

collections from Frederick Starr and John

a thin woven-fiber cord that was used to wrap a

Batchelor. He evaluated the Starr collection

mat securely around the body and then to

carefully, and he took full advantage of the

term “mustache lifter” in his cata¬

attach the wrapped body to a grave post. This

expertise that Batchelor had gained from his

logues and exhibits. He was not alone

cord was prepared by the wife or grandmother

long involvement with the Ainu people.

in this misrepresentation; many eariy

in secret for a deceased family member. It was

Culin's experience as a collector and scholar,

believed that without it the spirit of the

as well as his role in preparing Starr's materials

by the Ainu ikupasuy (prayer stick),
which he described with the erroneous

scholars had made the same mistake
by not understanding the important role

deceased would forever wander without a home

for the 1904 St. Louis Exposition, all contrib¬

ritual. This piece, which displays the

in the next world. Culin collected one of these

uted to his success as a field collector. Al¬

classic Ainu ayus pattern around its

cords and also a special funeral bonnet, which

though his approach was not systematic or

elongated slits, is of exceptional qual¬

widows wore for their one-year mourning

scientific in that he did not try to make a full

ity, like many purchased by Culin and

period,- widows in mourning were also recogniz¬

collection of all elements of material culture,

able because they wore their clothes inside out

he succeeded in obtaining an ethnographi-

and remained isolated indoors throughout this

cally important and representative collection.

of this sacred object in Ainu religious

Starr. (BMA 12.245)

period. Culin became interested in grave posts,

Culin purchased all the artifacts in the

which he saw at a small museum in Sapporo,

collection either in Ainu villages in Hokkaido

and later on the same trip he photographed

and the Kuriles or from curio shops, bazaars,

Ainu graves at Shiraoi (ibid.; 191).

local innkeepers, traders, and, of course, from

Culin's contributions to the Brooklyn

Batchelor and Starr. For Culin, the object

collection should also be examined in light of

itself was the most important informant.

his own personal interests. Textiles, for

Culin was not always systematic in his search

example, were one of Culin's special cross-

for "old material of good quality,” but he was

cultural passions, not only finished costumes,

adept at evaluating opportunities that

but also the materials and apparatus used to

presented themselves and so he procured rare

produce them. He purchased a small thread-

materials from diverse sources. He also had a

spool whose base was carved out as a

keen economic sense,- although he rarely

needlecase, noting that it was one of the few

negotiated a price, he was an experienced

new items that he had come across during the

and successful lauyer who was cautious about

1912 trip (our Japanese colleagues believe it

his initial purchases and proceeded by trial

might be a Japanese import or copy). He

and error. He often noted in his journal his

found finely carved wood battens or spatulas

disappointment at being unable to acquire

(attush-pera) used for weaving bark cloth at

certain unusual or fine artifacts.

Pitarupa, about which he noted: "To this
place, men and women brought things for

Although Culin kept quite meticulous
records about his field trips and his purchases,

sale, mostly carved loom knives which, on

the objects in the present Brooklyn Ainu

account of their age and beauty of their

collection retain little documentation other

designs, 1 bought" (ibid.: 170). Other weaving

than that in his field logs, expense notebooks,

equipment in the collection included loom

and trip reports. In the case of his Native

frames, a warp spacer, and a back-brace used

American collecting, he often commissioned

to supply tension to the back-strap loom

replicas in order to represent rare, unobtainable

system. Most importantly, he obtained several

objects. Similarly, Culin's records indicate that he

nettle-fiber garments (retarpe) and more than

found an old cradle and paid a local Ainu woman

twenty fine elm-bark (attusb) costumes (fig.

twenty yen to replace the calico and foreign

20.8); most of these are exquisite works of

strings with Ainu cordage. Culin himself always

textile arts and embroidery, and some are

judged an object's authenticity on whether it was

among the finest of their types in existence.
Within a remarkably short time, Culin

made for the Ainu's own use or for sale to the
Japanese,- to collect authentic materials, he

had assembled a vast range of objects for his

counted on careful field observations of objects

Ainu collection. He purchased objects on his

in use, and he also consulted reliable traders.

20/BMA: BATCHELOR, STARR, AND CULIN

159

60

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS /A. POSTER

20.8a.b

Retarpe Robe

Culin was an expert in weaving tech¬

The Brooklyn collection tells a story not

objects, from a collection of more than 1,100

only about the Ainu but also about the turn-of-

Ainu objects, in the permanent gallery of

the-century American curator. Culin was

Japanese art. Curators and educators in this

garments and sewing and weaving

charged with the responsibility to introduce

display chose the objects for the artistic

equipment. This robe is made of

unfamiliar cultures to an American audience

quality of individual pieces, but it also

nettle-plant fiber (irakusa) and is

using the range of artifacts available in the

represents the diversity and artistic heritage

called retarpe or tetarape, meaning

museum collection. He chose a wide range of

of the Ainu people.

nology, and so it was natural that he
would purchase large numbers of

“white things” in the Ainu ianguage.
Most retarpe were produced in Sa¬

objects to present Ainu culture and displayed
them at the Brooklyn Museum in 1912 as

The author ipishes to acknowledge the assistance of

to styles used by the Nivkhi and Man¬

individual objects that highlighted form, style,

Miyako Yoshinaga, who compiled the materials for

churian Chinese groups. This stun¬

technique, and function in Ainu culture.

this paper from Stuart Culin's 1912 "Report on a

ning robe, possibly the best of its

Today's Ainu presentation follows much of the

Collecting Trip in Japan, including a Visit to the

spirit of the original Culin display, but

Kurile Islands and the Hokkaido",- of Deborah Wythe

emphasizes art rather than ethnography.

of the Brooklyn Museum of Art Archives, and of

Batchelor, who sold it Stewart Culin

Reintroduced after a lapse of eighty years, it

Yoshinobu Kotani, who organized the 1993 inventory

in 1912. (BMA 12.690)

exhibits a highly selective group of twenty

of the Brooklyn Museum's Ainu artifacts.

khalin and have designs linking them

type in North America because of its
exceptional embroidery and applique
work, was purchased by John

20/ BMA: BATCHELOR, STARR, AND CULIN

161 •

I

N THE SPRING OF 190 1

21/An
Enthusiastic
Quest:
Hiram Hiller and
Jenichiro Oyabe in
Hokkaido, 1901
Adria H. FCatz

HlRAM M. HlLLER,

knew Ainu and spoke good English to

an American physician and amateur

interpret for him. As he pursued his inquiries,

ethnologist (fig. 21.1), had the opportunity

one name kept coming up: the man he needed

to go to Hokkaido to see the Ainu, a

to talk to, everyone said, was Jenichiro Oyabe

"curious people" whom he had long desired to

(fig. 21.2). Hiller met Oyabe in Tokyo, where

visit. In 1895-96, Hiller had interrupted his

Oyabe was working for an Ainu aid society,

medical career to accompany his friend

giving lectures to raise money for the educa¬

William H. Furness III on a private expedition

tion of the Ainu people. Oyabe readily agreed

to the Ryukyus and Sarawak for the purpose

to accompany Hiller to Hokkaido, and he

of gathering ethnographic collections for the

quickly swung into action by notifying the

University of Pennsylvania Museum. While in

newspapers of their trip, booking Hiller's

Japan on this trip, Hiller met Dr. Stuart

passsage to Hakodate, buying goods for trade

Eldridge, author of an article on the arrow

with the Ainu, and recruiting a Tokyo Univer¬

poison used by the Ainu, and from him

sity student named Ryunjiro Shirai to come

obtained a small collection of ethnographic

along as a general "servant."

items, sixteen of which were Ainu,- these

Oyabe gave Hiller a copy of his autobi¬

became the first Ainu specimens to be

ography, A Japanese Robinson Crusoe (1 898), and

acquired by the University Museum. In 1897,

while on the steamer to Hakodate, Hiller read

with another Philadelphia friend, Alfred C.

this account of what had already been an

Harrison Jr., he undertook a further five years

extraordinary life. Inspired by the story of the

of "eastern collecting" on behalf of the

Japanese hero Yoshitsune, the young Oyabe
decided to devote his life to working for the
Ainu, and in 1 884 at the age of seventeen, he
left home to go to Hokkaido and live in an
Ainu village. Concluding, however, that he
could save the Ainu only by introducing them
to "a true religion," he resolved to make his
way to America to get a Christian education.
He arrived in New York on Christmas Day
1888, and he soon found his way to the
Hampton Institute in Virginia, where he
enrolled in the agriculture department and
the normal school,- while at Hampton, he
converted to Christianity. He then studied at
Howard and Yale, was ordained, and served
two years in Honolulu as a missionary for the
Hawaiian Evangelical Association. By the end
of 1898 he was back in Japan, ready to resume

21.2

21.1

his life's mission. On the doors of the
Yoshitsune shrine near the Ainu village of

21.1, 21.2

Hiller and Oyabe

When Hiram Hiller went to Hokkaido in
1901 to make an Ainu collection for
the University of Pennsylvania Museum

museum, which was financed by Harrison's

Piratori he wrote a prayer that, two years

father. At the beginning of their final expedi¬

later, Hiller would see and transcribe in his

tion, to Sumatra, Hiller and Harrison stopped

journal: ". . . out of pity for the weak and poor

in Japan for several months. They arrived in

Ainu you came to help them. The hearts of

pany him as guide and interpreter. He

Yokohama at the end of March 1901, and

heroes beats [sic] the same today as in those

recorded his satisfaction with Oyabe in

while Harrison, who was not interested in the

days of old. For fifteen years I too have tried

his journal (1901): “It was lucky for me

side trip, concentrated on completing his

to help these poor natives as you did long

elaborate Japanese tattoos, Hiller prepared to

ago. Pity me, Spirit of Yoshitsune and accept

go to Hokkaido.

my prayer" (Hiller's journal, 12 May 1901).

he recruited Jenichiro Oyabe to accom¬

that he came, for he turned a doubtful
undertaking into an enthusiastic quest.
He was indefatigable, intensely in ear¬
nest, a trained student, and an agree¬

Hiller had no trouble making official

Hiller and Oyabe met in Hakodate on

able companion-all essentials when

arrangements for his trip, but he needed

May 6, took the steamer to Muroran, and set

you go to Yezo to visit the Aino settle¬

someone to advise him on such practical

out immediately for the Ainu villages. Shirai

details as methods of transportation, road

was sent ahead to the larger towns with the

ments.” (UPM S4-142865, T4-893)

162

conditions at that time of year, and where he

baggage, and Hiller and Oyabe traveled light:

should go to see the Ainu "to the best

"[Oyabe] has a pocket full of books and 1 have

advantage." He also needed someone who

a toothbrush and a camera—my baggage is

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / A. KATZ

Dear only knows where" (Hiller to his sister

was unnecessary, and Hiller agreed: "I am going

Lida, 9 May 1901). They went by train as far as

to do the photography myself to lessen the

Numanohata, then by stage, horse cart,

number of men. . . . Everyone advises taking a

horseback, and on foot, staying overnight at

small party among the Ainu" (Hiller to Lida, 1

Japanese inns or the houses of village leaders

May 1901). He took two cameras, one using

he called chiefs. The first part of the trip,

8x10-inch glass plates and the other a small

beginning in Muroran on May 8 and ending in

"pocket Kodak." The large camera was

Urakawa on May 27, covered villages along

cumbersome, especially when carried on

the coast and in the Mukawa and Saru river

horseback, and Hiller mined a certain number

valleys (fig. 21.3). The plan was to continue on

of plates: of a batch of twenty-four plates

to Kushiro and Nemuro, but in Urakawa Hiller

developed in Sapporo at the end of the trip, for

took stock. Because "horses were scarce, the

example, six were lost to overexposure, double

roads were bad and the Ainus few for the next

exposure, or fogging caused by leaky

hundred or so miles," he decided to return to

plateholders. In the end, however, he was glad

Hakodate and take a steamer to Kushiro,- in

he had brought both cameras: "You can't make

Hakodate, however, the steamer schedule was

good photos with films . . . you must have

interrupted by storms, and Hiller opted for a

plates and focus them, to get good detail. . . .

more modest excursion. He and Oyabe

Snap-shots are only for . . . genera! effect

undertook a weeklong tour of villages around

pictures in attitudes impossible in set photos—

Volcano Bay, beginning in Mori on May 29

so that they ought always to have some 'action'

and ending in Muroran on June 4.

in them. This is what 1 learned as a result of the
Ainu trip" (Hiller to Lida, 10 December 1904).

21.3 Hiller and Oyabe’s

Hiller's photographs, even when posed, tend to

Hokkaido Travels

have an unstudied, impromptu feel.

Hiller’s and Oyabe’s 1901

One of Hiller's main objectives was to

expedition to Hokkaido
was in two parts. The first

make notes on Ainu "manners and customs,”

was a tour of Ainu villages

by which he meant everything from habita¬

along the south coast of

tions, possessions, clothing, and ornaments

the island, from Muroran
to Urakawa and up into

to sickness and charms, death and burial, and

the Mukawa and Saru

religious beliefs. Although he recognized

river valleys. The second

that he could not learn much in just a few

was a circuit of Volcano

weeks and that he was handicapped by the

Bay, from Mori to

necessity of working through an interpreter,

Muroran. Hiller consid¬

he was undaunted. Before the trip, he

ered, but ultimately re¬
jected, the idea of continu¬

loto

evidently read the various papers about the

ing east as far as Nemuro

Benkai's'^ori

Ainu that had been published in the Transac¬

or north to the Sshikari
and Kamikawa regions.

faNT>

i

rlHakodate

tions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, including
several by John Batchelor and Basil Hall
Chamberlain,- "On the Arrow Poison in Use
Among the Ainos of Yezo” by Dr. Stuart
Eldridge,- and "Ainu Economic Plants" by

Altogether, they were on the road for
about a month, often passing through several

John Batchelor and Dr. Kingo Miyabe. In
Hokkaido he carried with him a copy of

villages a day and rarely spending more than a

Batchelor's The Ainu of Japan, which he

morning or an afternoon in any one of them.

considered "the only good thing in book

The pace was killing, the travel strenuous, and the

form on these people" (Hiller to Stewart

weather sometimes wet and cold, but somehow

Culin, 8 July 1901). When there was time,

Hiller managed to take a good number of photo¬

Oyabe read to Hiller passages from Japanese

graphs, keep a journal, and acquire a collection of

books on travel, history, and the Ainu.

nearly three hundred ethnographic and archaeo¬

Hiller's journal entries are an often bewilder¬

logical objects (figs. 21.4, 21.7, 21.8).
On previous expeditions, Furness or

ing mix of travel diary, descriptions of
villages, people, and objects, and Ainu

Harrison had taken the photographs, and at

responses to Oyabe's questioning, into which

first Hiller wanted to hire a photographer.

information from these various other sources

However, Oyabe pointed out that if Hiller

is interjected from time to time.

could handle the job himself, a photographer

21/UPM: HILLER AND OYABE

Hiller's other main objective was to

163

21.4

goods. It required some time and much
thought on his part to get the right articles
for the particular vendor and then began
the dickering—changing an article here,
withdrawing one there and finally adding a
little money. On the whole we paid about
the right price, for Oyabe sympathizes with
them and will not cheat. Moreover when
he finds a man who will only sell for money
he finds out if he is a drunkard and then he
will not buy with money only with goods...
When we had finished our purchasing, the
articles were all put into a mat, and a
woman carried them down to our inn ...
Ikastok accompanied us and helped us put
the names on each article (Hiller's journal,
10 May 1901).

Hiller was particularly eager to collect
objects associated with Ainu religion or
"superstitions," but these were harder to obtain.
Things that had been placed on the nusa
(special offering places near Ainu houses) and
objects to which inaw-kike (ritual willow
21.4, 21.5

Old-Style Headgear

Hiller was interested in documenting
customs and materials that were going

secure an ethnographic collection for the
University of Pennsylvania Museum. In Shiraoi,
Okotsonai, and Piratori, the villages in which he

out of style, like the use of hooded
headwear, in Motomuroran he photo¬

did most of his collecting, people brought

graphed a man and woman wearing

things to sell to him In his journal, Hiller

hoods; the hood displayed here is the

described how they proceeded in Shiraoi:
At the home of [head man] Ikastok we

right in the photograph. Hiller also re¬

gathered in all the villagers who had goods

objects he collected. The woman’s hood,
which he labeled hok abori, was listed by
John Batchelor in his 1905 Ainu dictio¬
nary as hokkamburr, both are Japanese
terms. (UPM A402; UPM neg. T4-891)

i64

never be bought. Among the things Hiller
found in his forays into and around Ainu
houses, but which he did not succeed in
buying, were some old quivers and knife
scabbards that "had outlived their usefulness
and had been dedicated to the gods" hanging

one that is worn by the woman on the

corded the Ainu names for most kinds of

shavings) had been attached could almost

to sell: bows, quivers, cloth, loom furniture,

on a nusa in Shikiu,- skewers for bear's meat
from the most recent bear ceremony on a nusa

dishes, etc. Oyabe then put them into piles

in Shiraoi,- and an heirloom quiver still in use

belonging to the different owners. By the

but with "a big bundle of inau" around its

side of each pile he placed combs, mirrors,

middle, also in Shiraoi. New skewers were

scissors, cloth, and other bazaar chattels as

made for Hiller, however, and the owner of the

he thought was the equivalent of the Ainu

heirloom quiver sold him a similar one without

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/A KATZ

inaw (Hiller's journal, 8 May to I Sept. 1901).

trenches dug by him, Oyabe, and Shirai at

Some things were relinquished with obvious

several sites. Excavation of a rectangular pit

reluctance. The head man of the village of

near Niewan yielded ashes, charcoal, charred

Oshamambe let him have a quiver to which

and broken bones, and flat round stones, but

were attached inaw and a wallet with a protec¬

in similar pits near Okotsonai they found

tive charm (the head of a small bird or animal),

"not even a trace of a fire-place." In a ravine

but according to Hiller, "the old man was veiy

on the road west of Niikappu, on both sides

particular that no one in the village should

of which were scattered pottery fragments

know that he had parted with such sacred

and stone tools, they dug down to a pave¬

relics else a deputation would await upon him

ment of flat stones accompanied by frag¬

to know why" (Hiller's journal, 31 May 1901).

ments of rope-marked pottery. Near

Toward the end of his trip, at a village

was full of broken pottery, stone tools, shells,

able to obtain a bear skull (after the annual

and broken bones. Oyabe was full of

Ainu bear ceremony, the skull of the bear was

speculations ("Oyabe's theories would make a

added to the nusa]. This nusa belonged to

book"), but Hiller was more skeptical: "From

Benkai, a head

the few facts that we gathered in these

man who, accord¬

various excavations we are not able to

ing to Hiller, had

conclude anything . . . beyond the fact that

"turned Japanese"

these pits were in some cases used as

and "does not care

habitation . . . and that the evidences of

to be called an

ante-historic habitations are to be found on

Ainu." Benkai (fig.

the south coast of Yezo as well as farther to

21.6) was some¬

the northward" (Hiller mss., Ch. XVII).

thing of a local

By the time he and Oyabe got to

celebrity, having

Volcano Bay, Hiller was buying selectively,

gone to Tokyo

filling perceived gaps in his ethnographic

with two bear cubs

collection. Into his description of the stage

as a present for the

trip to Mori is inserted what appears to be a

Crown Prince on

list of objects still wanted: "War club/ Bow/

the occasion of his

Arrow Case/ Millet shells/ Deer decoy/ Jews

marriage. Like
21.6

Benkai’s Family at Nusa

Motomuroran they explored a midden that

near Mori on Volcano Bay, Hiller was finally

many Ainu head men, he lived in a Japanese-

harp/ Wood pipe/ Japfanese] sake cups."
After the circuit of Volcano Bay, where he

Hiller took this photograph at a village

style house, but his house contained a

found the clubs he had not seen in the first

near Mori on May 30, 1901, at the

Japanese shrine and lacked Benkai's "treasures

part of his trip, Hiller went with Dr. Miyabe

in old Japfanese] ware"—his "former heir¬

to see the Ainu collection in the museum at

looms"—which he had contributed to a

the Sapporo Agricultural College: "Some

home of a man who, he said, “had
turned Japanese” and who agreed to
sell him a bear skull, which Hiller had
been unable to acquire else where on

collection made by him and a wealthy

Kurile Island and Saghalien Ainu specimans

his trip. Hiller offered to take a photo¬

Japanese friend, Dr. Mikaoka, in Mori. "No

[sic] a little different but Deer decoy and

graph of Benkai’s family, and noted,

orthodox Ainu," wrote Hiller, "would have

Jews harp alone are new to our list" (Hiller's

dared to desecrate his nusa as Benkai did."

journal, 6 June 1901). Although he toyed

“There was a wild scurry and much
hair-combing before they got ready to
be photoed, and then they looked like

Both Hiller and Oyabe were interested

briefly with the idea of going north to

a lot of Japanese in old theatricals”

in the relationship of the Ainu to the legend¬

Ishikari and Kamikawa, Hiller felt that he

(Hiller journal). Staging such a secular

ary folk called koropok-cjuru, associated with

had already done most of what he had set

photo opportunity at Benkai’s old sa¬
cred nusa (altar) with its animal-skull
offerings is a vivid presentation of

the pits to be seen near many Ainu villages,

out to do, so he returned to Yokohama: "The

and to the Stone Age people whose tools and

collection is all but complete—I have oceans

pottery (fig. 21.7) were being discovered at

of notes but, of course, in a month's trip 1

various places around Hokkaido. Oyabe was

can't know all 1 want to about the Ainus—I

dared to desecrate his nusa as

particularly excited by these questions:

have five big bundles and boxes of specimans

Benkai did," wrote Hiller, who had his

"'Koropok Guru,' 'Pits,' and 'Stone Age People'

[sic] that will make a representative collec¬

images colored for use as lantern

agitates the brain of the Japanese students,

tion—as good as any on earth" (Hiller to

and Oyabe had me riding hither and thither,

Lida, 6 June 1901).

how Ainu culture was changing at the
time. "No orthodox Ainu would have

slides in lectures. (UPM LS-16453)

digging holes, Etc. without any organized

In Yokohama Hiller claimed his baggage

plan" (Hiller's journal, 13 May 1901). Hiller

and released Shirai, who, saying that he was

insisted that they stop long enough to dig

"going to teach the Ainus,” left to rejoin

properly, and he described and sketched

Oyabe in Sapporo (Hiller's journal, 14 June

21 /UPM;

HILLER AND OYABE

165

had attended, and he asked Hiller to send him
a Kodak so that he could record such events in
the future. He also asked for a copy of the
British Anthropological Institute's Notes and
Queries on Anthropology, which described

standards for field collecting and documenta¬
tion The Kodak was gratefully received, but in
July 1903 Oyabe confessed that he had not
used it much because film and developing were
so expensive. Shirai, he said, was doing well
and was teaching at the school. In this,
apparently his last letter, he asked Hiller if he
could help him to arrange to take some Ainu
objects and an Ainu man and woman to exhibit
at the St. Louis Exposition (Letters from
Oyabe to Hiller, 15 September 1901, 15
March 1902, 14 April 1902, 3 July 1903).
For nine years after the trip with Hiller,
Oyabe remained in Hokkaido and continued
21.7 Spouted Pot

1901). He then turned his attention to

his work to educate the Ainu, and along the

Hiller was also interested in the ques¬

winding up the Ainu expedition before leaving

way he built several impressive collections.

for Sumatra: "My lantern slides (figs. 21.5, 21.6)

The LIniversity of Chicago anthropologist

came out beautifully—I have 48, and so well

Frederick Starr, who visited Oyabe in February

tion of Ainu origins and investigated ar¬
chaeological sites and collections in
Hokkaido. This spouted, rope-marked,
and dentate-stamped Post-Jomon-pe-

made and colored—my enlargements also came

1910, estimated that "he has more books and

riod pot is one of a number of well-pre¬

out fine. The collection has been sent home,

kakemono [literally, "hanging things," usually

served specimens that emerged in their

and I have 55 pages of notes that are in type¬

referring to scrolls, and in this case, Ainu-e] of

quest for the stone age peoples who

written form, almost ready for the printer"

the Ainu than are in any other Japanese

(Hiller to Lida, 13 July 1901). He wrote to

collections," and that his collection of Ainu

were thought to be the predecessors of
the Ainu. (UPM A522; neg. T4-895)

Stewart Culin, the University of Pennsylvania

photographs was "probably the most exten¬

Museum's Curator of Asia and General Ethnol¬

sive." His archaeological collection, which was

ogy, that "the Ainu specimans [sic] are labeled

"fine and includes over 1,000 specimens," he

and most of them can be displayed at once, if

considered "the only serious Hokkaido

you want to put them on exhibition" (Hiller to

Collection

Culin 8 July 1901). When he returned to

Oyabe showed him, Starr was most intrigued

Philadelphia in January of 1902 he found his

by the great variety of frontlets, divination

Ainu materials on view at the museum (arranged

skulls, and "moustache lifters (ikupasuy)". At this

on tables, probably), and by June he was able to

point, Oyabe was about to leave his school.

report that Culin had installed the Ainu

"He claims," wrote Starr, "he has given Ainu a

collection in the Oriental Hall, where it filled

sufficient share of his life's energy. . . . He will

two new cases: "It looks 100% better than I

continue to agitate in favor of Ainu advance¬

thought such rough material ever could look"

ment but as a secondary interest. His life now

(Hiller to Lida, 17 June 1902).

is to be given to combining the fundamental

Hiller and Oyabe continued to corre¬

points of Christianity with Shinto—in other

spond for a couple of years. When they were

words to found and preach a reformation of

together in Hokkaido, Oyabe had confided to

Shinto" (Starr 1909-11, Notebook 6. 46-48).

Hiller his plan to establish a model school, and

Why Oyabe left his school is something of a

in September of 1901 he reported that he had

mystery: he claimed that the years he had

built the school and a house for himself in

devoted to the Ainu had destroyed his health,

Abuta, where Shirai was living with him. In the

but Starr suspected that there had been some

spring of 1902 he sent Hiller a few additional

disagreement with "the Department." In any

items for his collection: a mouth harp, a deer

case, Oyabe returned to Tokyo, where, in

decoy, and a loom with unfinished cloth

December 191 1, he sold his ethnographic

woven from elm-bark-fiber (attush). (Because

collection to Starr.

weaving was done in the fall and winter, Hiller

166

Among the ethnographic artifacts

When Hiller returned from Sumatra,

had not been able to find a loom set up, with

Alfred Harrison's father offered to set him up

cloth on it.) He described a bear ceremony he

as resident manager of one of his sugar

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / A. KATZ

plantations, and Hiller

be used for this purpose" (Gordon to Hiller,

was soon caught up in

28 October 1905),- evidently the money never

plans for a move to

was forthcoming for it is still unpublished.

Cuba and for his

Although he was flattered that the Museum

impending wedding,

wanted to publish the manuscript, Hiller

preoccupations that,

himself claimed not to think much of it, and

he wrote, "take my

he did not pursue the matter further.

time away from such

The Sumatra expedition, with Hiller's side

frivolities as Anthro¬

trip to Hokkaido, marked the end of Hiller and

pology" (Hiller to his

Harrison's five years of collecting for the

mother, 25 July 1902).

University of Pennsylvania Museum. On the eve

Even while going back

of their departure for Gunong Soegi, the last

21.8 Tashiro with Easie Beak and Talon

and forth to Cuba, however, he managed to

Sumatran village they stopped at before heading

One of the first Ainu objects to enter

give some attention to winding up his Ainu

home, Hiller wrote: "Gunong Soegi will likely

the Pennsylvania collections was a

research. He turned over to a colleague at the

see the last of my Ethnographical & other field

University of Pennsylvania Medical School a

work, though I am liable to dabble at it for many

sample of Ainu arrow poison that he had found

years or even all of my life - in an amateur way"

knife and sheath acquired by Hiram
Hiiier from Dr. Stuart Eldridge in
Yokohama in December 1895.
Eldridge told Hiller that it was an

in the house of the head man at Okotsonai and

(Hiller to Lida, 3 September 1901). In fact,

“Ainu chief’s knife,” which had been

had managed to obtain "after a struggle." Dr.

during the Cuba years, Hiller's involvement

Edward T. Reichert observed the effects of the

with ethnography came to an end. In 1907 he

poison on a number of laboratory dogs and

returned to Philadelphia to resume the practice

had been suffering.” Kazuyoshi

concluded that these effects were consonant

of medicine, which he pursued until his death

Ohtsuka, Professor at the National

with the findings of Dr. Eldridge and Dr.

in 1921. His collections and field work remain,

Museum of Ethnology in Osaka, in¬

Miyabe that the active ingredient was aconite

however, and what he and Oyabe accomplished

presented to him "out of gratitude for
a hypodermic of morphia for the relief
of a bellyache from which the chief

spected this knife in February 1997
and concluded that its style was Japa¬
nese and that it probably had been
made by an Ainu for a non-Ainu. The
bird beak and claw on the sheath

(specifically, according to Miyabe, Aconitum

in Hokkaido, in a short time and under difficult

spp.) (Reichert 1903). Hiller also expanded his

conditions, is a tribute to their shared enthusi¬

notes on "the manners and customs of the

asm, determination, and commitment.

Ainu" and his travels in Hokkaido into a

have been identified as being from a

manuscript of some 50,000 words, which he

This article is drawn almost entirely from materials

white-tailed eagle (sea eagle,

submitted to George B. Gordon, Culin's

relating to Hiram M. Hiller's Hokkaido trip in the

Haliaeetus albicilla), whose range in¬

successor as Assistant Curator of General

University of Pennsylvania Museum Archives and

Ethnology at the University Museum. In

Photo Archives. Information about Frederick Starr is

October of 1905 Gordon notified him that the

from his field notes in the Department of Special

Board of Managers had accepted the manu¬

Collections, University of Chicago Library. Yujin

cludes Hokkaido. (UPM A17744A, B)

script for publication, but "it happens that

Yaguchi contributed information about the lives of

there is no money on hand at present that can

Jenichiro Oyabe and Ryunjiro Shirai.

21 / UPM

HILLER AND OYABE

16 7

I

N 1 869, THE YEAR OF ITS INCEPTION, THE

Anthropology, charged him with collecting

(AMNH) accepted a single Ainu snow-

objects of ethnological interest "at any islands

shoe (AMNH cat. no. 1/2402) into its

From
Snowshoe to
"Corn Mortars":

Frederick W. Putnam, then Curator of

American Museum of Natural History

in the Pacific" and gave some general

collection as a gift from the museum's first

guidelines regarding authenticity ("things

president, Albert L. Bickmore, who had

made and used by native peoples"), including

recently returned from a zoological journey

the desirability of illustrating methods of

through the Malay Archipelago, the Dutch

manufacture by collecting raw materials.

East Indies, Japan, Eastern Siberia, and China.

Putnam was particularly enthusiastic about

In public lectures after his travels, Bickmore

acquiring an Ainu collection and was already

would pique the curiosity of his audiences by

aware of those signature objects that would

asserting the theory, later disputed, that the

constitute Ainu culture in many collections

features of the Ainu essentially resemble those

and museum exhibits to come. As guidance

American Museum of

of Caucasians (Bickmore 1868: 403). Bickmore

for James, Putnam wrote:

Natural History

his challenge was soon taken up by European

Early Ainu
Collections at the

Laurel Kendall

was one of the first to promote this view, and

The Ainos weave a kind of cloth from a
grass which they make into a thread, and

and American scholars who began to investi¬

it will be worthwhile to try to secure a

gate Ainu relationships and ancestry from

complete hand loom with all the articles

historical, linguistic, and anthropological

used in weaving, including the grass

points of view (see Kreiner, this volume).

thread and if possible a piece of the cloth

In 1898 the museum initiated its first
handwritten catalogue of "Asian Ethnographic
Collections" with a gift of some eighty Ainu
objects from Arthur Curtiss James. In 1896

partly woven on the loom,- also specimens
of the grass itself. . . . You will come across
many of the so-called mustache sticks
[ikupasuy] which are more or less elabo¬
rately carved, and a collection of these

James was a wealthy young man with the

would be especially interesting owing to

means to realize his scientific interests in an

the symbols carved upon them and as

expedition, although on a smaller scale than

furnishing the means of studying these

that undertaken by the similarly well-endowed

sticks which probably have some

William H. Furness, Hiram M. Hiller, and

religious significance. . . . The Ainos have

Alfred C. Harrison, who collected extensively
for the University of Pennsylvania Museum

peculiar religious ceremonies, using prayer
sticks and various symbolic devices all of
which are important, and still more so if

(see Katz, this volume). James organized a
trans-Pacific cruise to record an eclipse in

meaning of the symbols, or how and why

northern Japan. Before his departure, he

the various objects are used (Putnam to

contacted the AMNH, offering his assistance

James, 20 March 1896, AMNH Anthro¬

to the nascent Department of Anthropology.

pology Archive).

22.1 Shiraoi Ainu
This photograph of an Ainu group at
Shiraoi was taken ca. 1900, long before
Shiraoi became an Ainu tourist attrac¬
tion in the late twentieth century. Today
the Ainu Museum at Shiraoi is an impor¬
tant research center for Ainu cultural
studies where exhibits of Ainu artifacts
are presented and Ainu cultural tradi¬
tions are demonstrated to the public.
(AMNH 338769)

168

you can obtain a knowledge of the

MUSEUM

COLLECTIONS / L KENDALL

By the turn of the century the Ainu had
already been inscribed upon the western

"collector" rather than simply as a "benefac¬
tor," "donor," or "facilitator." In his case, these

ethnographic imagination as a people who

roles appear to have been mixed more than

wove textiles from unusual fibers (attusb made

they were in most other museum collecting

from elm bark and retarpe from the nettle

programs. A few years later, James would

plant) and used in their rituals elaborately

quietly finance the purchase of Ainu artifacts

carved prayer sticks that doubled as libation

assembled on behalf of the museum by

wands (ikupasuy) and whittled offering sticks

Bashford Dean. Throughout his life, his

(rump). They were a people possessed of a

philanthropy would be cloaked in anonym¬

material culture sufficiently distinct and

ity, with some of his generosity revealed only

mysterious to pique late-nineteenth-century

after his death (New York Times, 6 August

curatorial desire. The Ainu had already become

1964). In this instance, being there—and

the subjects of scientific writing and travelers'

perhaps his youth—seems to have made a

accounts (Chamberlain 1887c). Putnam may

difference in how he regarded the work,-

have been aware of Hitchcock's collecting for

certainly he was closer to the action of this

the Smithsonian and Odium's for the Royal

modest enterprise than AMNH President

Ontario Museum (Kotani 1993a).

Morris K. Jesup was to the massive endeavor

In Hokkaido, James turned the responsi¬

that bears his name, the Jesup North Pacific

bility for collecting over to Professor Nitobe

Expedition (fig. 22.3). Even so, it would

of the Agricultural College at Sapporo, who

seem that the actual collector of the "James

was said to be "nearly as renowned as Dr.

Collection" was Professor Nitobe or, most
precisely, the two nameless students who

22.2

Bashford Dean

wandered through the villages. In any case,

Naturalist Bashford Dean was about
to set out on a zoological expedition

the Sakhalin material in this collection, and

to Japan when Franz Boas, Curator

perhaps other things as well, would have

of Anthropology at the American

been precollected by dealers already active

Museum of Natural History, suggested

in Hokkaido.

he try to collect materials from the

What sort of collection was it? Putnam

Ainu. Dean took up the suggestion
and in September 1900 assembled

had been emphatic that "the value of any

a large collection that forms the core

ethnological object is increased ten-fold by

of the American Museum of Natural

an authentic label stating where it comes

History’s Ainu collection. In time

from and such information as can be ob¬

Dean became Curator of Fishes at

tained relating to it." He suggested that

the museum, but his diverse talents

James take a number of Dennison tags "to tie

led him in other directions as well:

upon the specimens you may obtain and thus

he also became Curator of Arms and
Armor at the Metropolitan Museum

label them as you secure them" (Putnam to

of Art and Professor of Zoology at

James, 20 March 1896). Someone, probably

Columbia University. This photograph

Nitobe, did take care to record local words

was taken when he was a major during

and brief slugs of description, as shown by

World War I. (AMNH 312546)

some typical catalogue entries:
John Batchelor as an authority on Ainu

70/20. Karop. Used to hold the flint and

manners and customs." Batchelor, whose

steel, knife, tobacco, and sword guards

scholarly writings on the Amu had secured his

and other things which the Ainu, in case

reputation, was not available as a collector but

of necessity, uses as indemnity, and other

did send copies of his publications back to the

things used in traveling and hunting.

museum. Nitobe, armed with a copy of

70/26. Kamuiparatek. Bear's foot. Not used

Putnam's instructions, agreed to supervise two

by the Ainu for any particular purpose.

of his students who would "go throughout the

Perhaps kept for the sake of the Japanese

country and pick up the things you want as

(ie. to sell) or by a Japanese.

best they could." James arranged to have the

Following Putnam's directive, the

collection shipped, and by December 1901, it

collection includes a range of tools, weapons,

was installed in a museum showcase with a

and objects of daily use, religious objects,

plaque acknowledging his contribution (James

clothing, and jewelry. The tufted sticks

to Winser, 10 December 1901).

(inaw), prayer sticks (ikupasuy), and weaver's

James's activities for the museum raise
interesting questions about his role as

22 /AINU COLLECTION

AT

AMNH

tools specifically requested by Putnam are
represented, and there is a house model, one

169

of many brought to

tion. Dean, a true Renaissance man, would

the museum in

become the distinguished Curator of Fishes at

those years in order

the AMNH, Professor of Zoology at Colum¬

to display a range

bia University, and Curator of Arms and

of world cultures

Armor at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

within the confines

(The link between these apparently disparate

of museum cases.

lines of interest was bodily protection: arms

Although Nitobe

and armor, whether of men or Devonian

and his student

fishes [Osborn 1929]).

collectors had put
together an

accident. About to depart on an AMNH

admirable collec¬

zoological expedition to Japan, he met with

tion of finished
22.3

Crescent Carving

This finely carved bone or ivory tool was
collected by Berthold Laufer from the
Sakhalin Ainu in 1899 as part of his

Dean became a collector almost by

Ainu objects, similar to others that had been

Franz Boas, then Curator of Anthropology,
who indicated that the AMNH might be

assembled there earlier, Putnams instructions

interested in whatever Dean could collect

for broader representative materials and

among the Ainu, and a seed was planted. Dean

documentation needed to support his

describes in a letter to Boas how he went to

tion. Laufer spent little time with the Ainu

emergent concept of "museum anthropology"

Hokkaido with the idea of merely visiting

and his collections from this and other

was not fulfilled. In Sapporo a collection was

Hakodate but then became inspired to make the

groups of the Lower Amur region disap¬

understood to mean things and tools used to

collection himself and "started in on a somewhat

pointed Boas, who had hoped for a large

make things, but not the raw materials from

enthusiastic collecting trip" (ibid.). Dean is thus

which things were fashioned: for instance,

one among that company of turn-of-the-century

loom pieces were collected, but not elm bark

naturalist-collectors who made an easy transi¬

for weaving. And although Putnam had

tion between zoological specimens and objects

requested photographs both of "the people in

of material culture: men like the biologist

natural poses" and individual portraits "full

Edward Sylvester Morse, whose sudden

front and exact profile" to "bring out the

infatuation with things Japanese would enrich

work for the Jesup North Pacific Expedi¬

collection from this region. Although the
implement's use was not recorded, it
resembles a sailor’s marlin spike used to
loosen knots, and its decoration is
similar to styles from the
Asian mainland. (AMNH
70/1739)

physical characteristics of the people in the

the Peabody Essex Museum, and Herbert Lang

way that anthropologists require for compara¬

and James Chapin who would make a combined

tive study" (Putnam to James, 20 March

zoological and ethnographic collection in

1 896), no photographs were taken.

Central Africa for the AMNH (Rosenstone

A few years later, in September
1900, Bashford Dean (fig. 22.2)
traveled through Hokkaido
and assembled the
museum's largest
Ainu collec¬

1988, Schildkrout and Keim 1990).
Dean's handwritten catalogue begins
with the statement, "The following material
was collected by me in Hokkaido (Yezo)
during September 1900, and with the
exception of some objects from Piratori and
Saghalien [Sakhalin], it was secured by me
personally at the Aino villages" (Bashford
Dean catalogue, AMNH, Anthropology
Archive, 1901-77). Who accompanied him?
Who led him to places where objects might
be acquired? Who led him through delicate

22.5 Ikupasuy

negotiations over the purchase of

Among the objects from Hokkaido and
Sakhalin acquired by Arthur Curtiss
James was this unusual ikupasuy that

family heirlooms? Dean's collection
of 288 objects includes, in his

accentuates the peculiar nature of its

words, "a little of everything

natural form. "Found objects” and ab¬

in the Aino way,- weap¬

stract forms of modern Ainu art have a

ons, costumes,

long history in Ainu culture. (AMNH
70/23)

utensils, a few
models, and
quite a

<70

the several hundred objects that he col¬
lected, which include such useful information
as the name of the village where each object
was acquired. Compared with the James
catalogue, one misses the local words for
things and the ethnographic descriptions of
how objects were used. Dean's entries are
brief and descriptive: "70/3959 (8) Embroi¬
dered headband of woman Dark blue and
white. Shiraoi. 70/3986 (34) Skinning knife
with long wedge-shaped handle. Shikiu."
He rarely provides a local word: "Iku-pasui"
from the James list becomes "mustache
stick" in the Dean entries. After a few pages
of such abbreviated entries, it is refreshing
to stumble upon Dean's note with "corn
mortar: small specimen" (AMNH 70/4085
(131) Shiraoi):
These specimens are difficult to collect.
I was able to secure the present one on
condition that the ijobei [inaw], which
were especially prepared for it, should
accompany it, attached to its margin,
in the museum. The owner assured me
that it had given food to his family for
several hundred years (?) and that he
did not want to offend it. So I must
take it on the condition that the gohei
shall not be separated from it (Bashford
Dean catalogue).
Here, at least, the object is embedded in a
larger world of meaning that adheres to it
even when it is entered as a "specimen" in a
natural history catalogue. But how, and
through what mediation, was this knowledge
communicated to Dean? What circumstances
prompted the owner to give up an object
that still commanded so much respect?
Hokkaido Ainu culture had already
progressed far beyond Putnam's vision of native
communities, which was informed primarily by
the Native American situation, where the naive
traveler, with a minimum of professional
22.4 It’s an IkupasuyI

number of pieces connected with their curious

direction, might easily assemble an ethno¬

religious rites" (Dean to Boas, 24 October

graphic collection from objects of daily use

These wonderfully abstract prayer sticks
from Hokkaido illustrate a small portion of

1901). Dean paid particular attention to

(figs. 22.3-22.9). Dean describes a Hokkaido

can Museum of Natural History, eleven

garments (fig. 22.6), recognizing that they

where Ainu material "is very difficult to come

collected by Arthur Curtiss James from

were "highly prized . . . and they represent a

by at any cost" (Dean to Boas, 24 October

more than fifty specimens in the Ameri¬

Hokkaido and Sakhalin between 1896

vast amount of hand-work, and the ancient

1901),- things had to be hunted down, and high

family belongings are somewhat difficult to

prices paid. Dean's catalogue is sprinkled with

region in 1900. The terms used to de¬

secure" (ibid.). Memorialized as a man

notations that particular objects were "rare,"

scribe them are almost as numerous as

possessed of a "native sense of form and

"difficult to acquire," or "the only one in the

the artistic treatments themselves and

beauty" (Osborn 1929), Dean brought many

community." In his letter to Boas, he speaks of

and 1898, and thirty-nine by Bashford
Dean from Ainu villages in the Saru River

include mustache stick, mustache lifter,

stunning examples of Ainu textiles to the

having experienced an "interesting and

AMNH collection.

sometimes quite difficult time in securing a

libation wand, and prayer stick. But none
does justice to this complex religious
article except its own name, ikupasuy.

Dean's training as a naturalist is evident

prize object" and indicates that the cost of

(AMNH 70/4189, 70/4192, 70/2955)

in the precise field entry he wrote for each of

making an Ainu collection ($250) was far

11 /AINU COLLECTION

AT

AMNH

174

22.6 Retarpe Robe
Nettle fiber made excellent
cloth, lighter and thinner
than elm bark; this cloth
was called either retarpe or

tetarpe, which mean “white
things." Most of these
garments were produced in
Sakhalin and share some
designs with Nivkhi, Nanai,
and Chinese garments. This
piece was collected in
Sakhalin by Berthold Laufer
during the Jesup North
Pacific Expedition in 18981900. (AMNH 79/906)

172

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / L KENDALL

■H

■ MM
L»ft

ffipill

■■-

11111 11
pMpi

'■': : '.

' T
'ifliMmfw

gsgllgfcT

22 /AINU COLLECTION

AT

AMNH

173

22.7

good-quality tourist album. The competitive

Tobacco Pouch

Chinese or Russian blue beads adorn

spirit among collectors seems to have been

the margins of this Sakhalin Ainu to¬

well established by the time of Dean's visit.

bacco pouch (ruyomah) collected by

As in so many other places, visitors like Dean

Arthur Curtiss James ca. 1896-98.
Pouches made of sealskin, here sewn

relied on leads supplied by expatriates like

in an elaborate piecework construction,

Batchelor, and the "coup" of a particularly

were common among Sakhalin Ainu, for

good find fueled conversations between them.

whom seal was an important economic

Batchelor evidently saw Dean's materials, for

resource. (AMNH 70/15)

the catalogue makes reference to his evalua¬
tion of Dean pieces that "appear to be of
exceptional rarity" (Bashford Dean catalogue).
Between Bickmore's fragmentary sketch of
the Ainu published in 1868 and Putnam's letter
to James in 1896, the Ainu had come into focus
as a people of ethnographic significance whose
lifeways might be apprehended through the
acquisition of their distinctive material culture,
or so it was assumed at the time. As curators in a
newly established Department of Anthropology,
both Putnam and Boas thought it important to
acquire Ainu collections for the museum. Ainu
religion, described as "peculiar” by Putnam and
"curious" by Dean, intrigued both Boas and
Putnam, and they placed a high value on
obtaining its material manifestations: if it
could not be understood, it might at least be
collected for future decoding. Early reports
from Bickmore and others that the Ainu were
Caucasoid look-alikes fueled the interest of
early anthropologists, but if this were the
extent of scholarly interest, then we should
expect only a ghoulish traffic in bones. The

22.8

Carved Pipe

greater than he had anticipated (ibid.).

history of early collecting at the American

The Ainu used tobacco pipes (kiseri) of

Local entrepreneurs seem to have

two different types: metal and wood.

become middlemen in collecting and securing

that by the end of the last century, Ainu

objects from remote villages and even as far

objects were prized by collectors both as

personally from a curved branch of the

away as Sakhalin. Someone in Hokkaido

pieces in an intriguing ethnographic puzzle

hydrangea tree, which naturally has a

seems to have been skilled at making the

and as examples of beautiful and elaborate

hollow core. A rare sacred pipe (kamuy-

models of Ainu life that turn-of-the-century

handiwork, even as these things were passing

museum curators wanted for their displays,

from common use.

Metal pipes were acquired by trade,
while wood pipes (rasupani) were made

kiseri) used in the bear-sending ceremony
had two stems carved from a forked
branch, one stem for the bear and one
for a man. Bashford Dean collected this
pipe in Shiraoi in 1900. (AMNH 70/3998)

i74

Museum of Natural History instead suggests

for models appear in both the James and the
Dean collections. The Ainu photographs that

Several members of the staff of the American Museum of

Dean gave to the American Museum of

Natural History assisted in the preparation of this

Natural History (fig. 22.1) are not his own

essay: Belinda Kaye, Nina Root, Joel Sweimler, Jane

field shots, but appear to be pages from a

Liu, and most particularly, Ann Wrigbt-Parsons.

MUSEUM

COLLECTIONS / L. KENDALL

22.9, 22.10

Strike-a-Light Kit

Ainu fire kits (piwci) contained a steel
striker, a quartz stone, and tinder of
powdered wood fungus or charcoal.
These materials were stored in a
pouch (karop) and were used to light
pipe tobacco and fires for cooking
and heat. The steel usually came
from broken iron pots or knives.
Laufer collected this kit, made of
sturgeon skin ornamented with an
ivory bead and a Japanese coin, in
Sakhalin in 1899. The fire kit would
be worn suspended from a man’s
belt along with his smoking kit,
as is seen here in an Ainu-e
from Drawings of Travels

through Ezo (1799) by Gentan
Tani. (AMNH 70/1263; HML)

22.10

22.9

22 /AINU COLLECTION

AT

AMNH

i 75

T

he term "Ainu collections" is

Japanese
Ainu
Collections
Nobukatsu Aoyagi
AND KojI DeRIHA

often misinterpreted to mean

artifacts in Japan was created in order to

items gathered in the distant past.

exhibit these items at the Vienna World's Fair

Ethnological collections in general

of 1873 in the exhibit of arts and special

are often perceived by the public as consisting

products of Japan. Two examples of each

of materials used to study distant peoples and

item were collected so that one could be sent

faraway cultures and utilized for educational

to the World's Fair and the other could be

purposes in museums. Although many Japanese

kept in a museum. Some of these specimens

museums do indeed have such historical

are now housed in national ethnology

collections, some museums in Hokkaido

museums in Vienna and Berlin,- others that

actively collect and exhibit newly produced

remained in Japan became part of the

items in order to represent modern Ainu

collection of the Tokyo National Museum.

culture and history and will continue to

One good example is clothing worn by an

collect Ainu-related materials. This essay

Ishikari Ainu named Yajuro Shimura in

presents an overview of both types of collec¬

1872, which along with a picture of

tions in Japanese institutions.

Shimura, are rare items that illustrate the

Many museums in Japan, especially
those in Hokkaido, house Ainu-related
materials,- these collections vary in size and

23.1

The first systematic collection of Ainu

material culture of the Ishikari Ainu.
In 1879 a temporary museum of the
Hokkaido Settlement Mission, Hakodate

quality. Most of these items were gathered by

Branch, was established through a recom¬

scholars and enthusiasts after the late nine¬

mendation by Horatio Capron, former

teenth century, but a limited number of

Assistant Secretary of the Department of

objects were collected prior to that time.

Agriculture of the United States, who served

Unfortunately, in some of these collections it

as an adviser to the Hokkaido Settlement

is not uncommon for artifacts to lack basic

Mission. This was the first publicly founded

ethnological information, such as location,

museum outside of a large city, and it was the

collector, owner, or makers name.

predecessor of the Hakodate City Museum

Wood Tray

This carved tray in the Kono Collection
at the Asahikawa City Museum displays
the exquisite carving and patina of an
old Hokkaido Ainu utensil that must
have been a treasured family heirloom
before being sold to a museum or col¬
lector. Its central whorl motif, known to
Ainu as morew and cut in low relief,
was used widely in Ainu art and decora¬
tion. (ACM)

176

MUSEUM

COLLECTIONS/ N. AOYAGI AND K DERIHA

(Hasabe 1977). Ainu artifacts assembled for
the museum became the foundation of one of
the two oldest Ainu collections in Japan, the
other being that of the Tokyo National
Museum. In addition to these two collec¬
tions, the one gathered by the Hokkaido
Settlement Mission itself is also reknowned
as an old collection. Several other Ainu
collections housed in Japanese museums are
discussed below.

The Tokugawa Collection
(Tokyo National Museum)
This is the collection of Yorisada Tokugawa,
the sixteenth head of the Tokugawa family in
Kishu (Sasaki 1988,- Tokyo Kokuritsu
Hakubutsukan 1992). The majority of the
Ainu materials came from the collection of
the Doda Anthropological Study, which was
headed by Motohiro Nijo, a prominent
member of the society (which was estab¬
lished by a group of nobles around I 897 at
the suggestion of anthropologist Shogoro
Tsuboi). Other materials in the collection
23.2

were donated or purchased. The Doda

Attush Sample Kit

This sample kit was created for edu¬

artifacts were collected in Hokkaido and

cational purposes by the Historical

Sakhalin around 1900 by Kanichi Nonaka, a

Museum of Hokkaido for use in

young anthropologist who was supported by

school tours and docent instruction.
It includes samples of Hokkaido Ainu

attush design techniques and identify¬
ing labels. (HMH)

23.3

Modern Ainu Bags

Modern Ainu bags are still made with
traditional embroidery patterns. Such
items are collected by the Historical
Museum of Hokkaido to document
the tradition and change in the his¬
tory of Ainu material culture. (HMH)

23 /JAPANESE AINU

COLLECTIONS

i 77

a large carved wooden bowl, a tray, an attusb
bag, and a Western-style hat woven from the
fiber of a wild plant (Elymus mollis Trin.), which
indicates early cultural exchange. Perhaps
government officials at that time planned to
develop a craft industry utilizing traditional
Ainu techniques and designs in hopes of
promoting tourism and Hokkaido products.
Compared with collections overseas,
Japanese Ainu collections have fewer ex¬
amples of raw materials used to make tools
and less information on how the artifacts
were actually produced. However, the
Hokkaido Takushokukan collection does
include such items as specimens of plant
fibers, which may reveal unusual insight on
the part of the collectors, whose identities are
not documented.
23.4

Antique-Store Laoquerware

For more than one hundred years,

Nijo, but it is not known how these items

The Kono Collection

came into the possession of the Tokugawa

(Asahikawa City Museum)

when they needed money Ainu sold
their old household artifacts to mu¬

family. The collection includes a rare Sakhalin

seum collectors, anthropologists, and

Ainu ceremonial headdress topped with a bird

tourists, or to antique shops in Hok¬

cranium,- a similar article is found in the Kono

kaido and elsewhere in Japan. In this

Collection, but they are the only two known

way most families gradually lost their

to exist in Japan. The Tokugawa Collection

heirlooms and treasures, most of which
are now in museums around the
world—3,200 in North America, 5,700

forms the core of Ainu materials in the Tokyo
National Museum.

in western Europe, and an equivalent
number in Russian collections including
4,700 in St. Petersburg, and 30,000 in

Three generations of Konos (Tsunekichi,
Hiromichi, and Motomichi Kono) collected a
total of 1,800 artifacts, including 1,600 that
are Ainu-related. Exactly when Tsunekichi
began the collection is not known, but he
went to Hokkaido for the first time in 1894
(Aoyagi 1997). After that visit, he frequently
toured many regions of Hokkaido while

The Hokkaido Takushokukan

conducting settlement surveys commissioned

Collection

by the Hokkaido government,- on these

lected in the 1950s, had been used by

(Historical Museum of Hokkaido)

surveying trips, he also did archaeological and

the Ainu for ritual ceremonies. (HMH)

Many ethnological collections that were

ethnological research. The collection includes

Japan. These lacquerware cups, col¬

shown in particular expositions later entered

one small wooden box made by the Kurile

the permanent collections of various museums,-

Ainu (fig. 23.5), which was purchased by a

some Ainu collections in Japanese museums

government official of Nemuro prefecture on

were created in this manner. In 1918 an expo¬

a fact-finding trip to Shikotan, Urup, and

sition to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of

other Kurile islands. The official gave the box

the Hokkaido Settlement Mission was held in

to Tsunekichi in 1909, and it may have been

Sapporo,- the Hokkaido Takusho-kukan was

the impetus for his collection.

one pavilion at the exhibition where 392 Ainu
artifacts were exhibited. After being stored for
several decades, these artifacts were given to

focus for scientific inquiry around 1930 when he

the Historical Museum of Hokkaido upon its

began serious archaeological and ethnological

opening (Deriha 1991). These items are valued

surveys and started to collect of Ainu artifacts.

not only as a large collection created in the

He later became a leader in this field, compiling

early 1900s but also as a source for learning

notes from surveys of Hokkaido sites that

about the public's perception of the Ainu

provide valuable information, thus enhancing

people at that time.

the quality of the collection and providing

The collection includes such religious

178

Tsunekichi's second son, Hiromichi, who
had studied entomology in college, found a new

indispensable information for studies of Ainu

artifacts as a prayer stick (ikupasuy) and an

collections and culture. The Kono Collection

arrow case for ceremonies,- hunting devices

(figs. 23.3, 23.6, 23.9) contains a number of

such as a bow and arrow and a trap,- clothes, a

items that reveal basic technological data,- other

sash, and a wooden bowl of the Sakhalin Ainu.

objects have charming stories. One example of

In addition to the standard items that intro¬

the latter involves a sealskin coat that

duce traditional Ainu culture, also included are

Tsunekichi acquired in Sakhalin before 1917 as

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / N. AOYAGI AND K. DERIHA

23.6

Sakhalin Necklace

a gift for his son Hiromichi, who wore it to

Sakhalin Ainu women wore necklaces

school during the winter. One day when

that were similar to those of mainland

Hiromichi was wearing the coat, a dog pursued

groups around the lower Amur River.

him, sniffing and barking. Although Hiromichi

The brass bar and beads in this fine
Kono Collection piece probably were

ran, the dog followed him until he took off the

obtained by trade from the Amur,

coat, put it under his arm, and sprinted away. The

where necklaces were worn not only

dog had become excited by the strong-smelling

for decoration and status symbols but

sealskin that the Sakhalin Ainu used to make

also to ward off ill health and evil.
Women often cannibalized necklaces,

durable clothing. The story is a colorful reminder

mixing and matching until they had a

of the Kono family's collecting tradition and

style and composition that suited their

Hiromichi's boyhood.

taste. (ACM)

Motomichi, Hiromichi's son, is the latest
Kono family member to collect Ainu materials.
After completing graduate school at Tokyo
University, he has become one of but a few
anthropologists studying the Ainu. In particular,
he has researched Ainu design, comparing it to
patterns found on prehistoric pottery.
Baba Collection
(Hakodate City Museum) and
Kodama Collection
(Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan, Shiraoi,
and Hakodate City Museum)
The Baba and Kodama Collections were
created by two men who grew up in the same
period in Hakodate without ever meeting each
other, although both spent their boyhoods
playing among local archaeological remains
and became interested in archaeology. Osamu
Baba organized people interested in archaeol¬
ogy and established the Hakodate Archaeol¬
ogy Study Group in 1907 when he was only
fifteen years old. Baba studied dentistry in

23.5

Kurile Box

This decorated wood box from the
Kono Collection in the Asahikawa City
Museum was collected from the
Kurile Ainu and displays the distinc¬
tive style of this region. (ACM)

23 /JAPANESE AINU

COLLECTIONS

179

college and later opened a practice in Tokyo

Baba acquired from an Ainu woman in Abuta

after completing his studies in the United

during his 1930 collecting trip to the Usu

States. Sakuzaemon Kodama, after studying

region (Baba 1979). Recalling the occasion,

in Switzerland, obtained a position at the

Baba described how the woman had apolo¬

Imperial University of Hokkaido in 1929. It is

gized to her mother for handing over the

amusing to imagine that Baba and Kodama,

mother's garments while telling her that Baba

with a three-year difference in their ages and

would take good care of them. On his way

a common interest in exploring Hokkaido,

back to Tokyo, he dropped by the Hakodate

Sakhalin, and the Kuriles while collecting

City Library where he was asked by its

enormous numbers of artifacts, might have

director, Kenzo Okada, to leave the five

encountered each other face-to-face some¬

kimono,- persuaded by Okada's enthusiasm,

where in the city of Hakodate without being

Baba donated them and returned to Tokyo.

aware of the other. Baba focused his energy

These five kimono survived the war and are

on the ethnology and archaeology of north¬

the only five existing kimono in the collection.

ern Japan and began collecting Ainu-related

the war was the great collection of ikupasuy

this rare opportunity now, 1 will regret it for

gathered by Sueo Sugiyama, a leader in the

the rest of my life" (Baba 1971.- 1,-Hasebe

field of craft history,- these items were

1992). Meanwhile, Kodama visited local

considered to be a gem among the Ainu

antique stores every Sunday from the time he

collections. Fortunately, though most of his

began his job at the university, enthusiasti¬

collection burned, it can still be studied

cally collecting Ainu articles. He took note of

through pictures published in his books.

the rapid sales of traditional Ainu materials to

23.7

Neil Munro’s Nibutani Home

Neil G. Munro, a physician born in
1863 in Edinburgh, Scotland, moved to
Hokkaido and spent many years living
in Nibutani. He served the Ainu both as

Among the collections destroyed during

materials in April 1930, saying, "If I don't take

The Kodama Collection includes 5,000

foreigners in the post-World War II period,

items, which were published in a catalogue

and he commented later, "I planned to buy as

raisonne by the Hakodate City Museum

many materials as possible from merchants to

(1987) and the Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan

avoid losing valuable materials overseas . . .

in Shiraoi (1989, 1991). Clothing and

part of these materials are now in my posses¬

accessories, such as robes and necklaces,

sion" (S. Kodama 1969: 152).

account for about half of the collection

More than half of the 2,000 articles Baba

Religious items, including 1,400 ikupasuy, also

doctor and scholar, recording and writ¬

collected were burned when Tokyo was

make up a large part of the collection.

ing about their culture. His work on

bombed in March 1945,- the 755 items that

Smoking paraphernalia constitute another

Ainu religion and philosophy are espe¬

survived are currently housed at the Hakodate

important part of the collection, for these

City Museum in the only collection designated

objects document smoking rituals of the

cially valuable. From about 1931 until
his death in 1942, he amassed a large

as Important National Ethnological Cultural

Sakhalin Ainu and illustrate the diversity of

Nibutani. Today his home is owned by

Property. The remainder of the collection

regional Ainu traditions.

Hokkaido University.

includes five kimono (Hasebe 1992), which

collection of Ainu artifacts from

Because many of the materials were
purchased at antique shops, they lack basic
ethnological information,- in contrast, the items
Kodama collected while conducting archaeo¬
logical surveys benefit from his fastidious
documentation. Although he worked full time,
Kodama studied the collection in his spare

^ VSl: IpfiiffT:--

time and encouraged his family to share in his

S9H

collection work: his wife began studying

54

clothes and accessories in 1947, and his eldest
daughter, Mari Kodama, engaged in research
(M. Kodama 1989) on weaving patterns,
design, and embroidery techniques (see
Kodama, this volume).

Neil G. Munro Collection
(Hokkaido Takushoku Kinenkan)
Neil G. Munro was born in Edinburgh, Scotland,
in 1863. After completing his medical studies at
Edinburgh University, he moved to Japan where
i 80

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS / N AOYAGI

AND

K DERIHA

he worked among the Ainu as a physician,

certain theme, while others collect anything

gathering information important to Ainu studies

related to Ainu culture. Unfortunately, when

while providing medical service to the Ainu

items are collected in this way, ethnological

people (fig. 23.7). His collection came primarily

data—such as location, year of manufacture,

Sakhalin Ainu carver. Few speci¬

from Nibutani in Hokkaido and was assembled

producer, and the Ainu-language word for

mens of such high quality as this

from about 1931 until his death in 1942.

the object—are often lost, if they were ever

23.8

Tobacco Box

and Pipe Holder

This smoking kit with its carved
ivory or bone ornaments shows the
remarkable skills of an unknown

one from the Korio Collection exist
in American collections. (ACM)

Munro was especially interested in Ainu

known in the first place. Lack of ethnological

religion, and his research was published as Ainu

data does not necessarily mean that the items

Creed and Cult (1962). His collection reflects this

are useless for research, for the last collection

interest with many items related to shamanism,

date is usually known, so it is certain that the

faith, and rituals,- its focus is thus on a certain

particular item was used or produced prior to

facet of the Ainu culture rather than covering

that date. If a collection was formed by one

Ainu life in general. Many such theme-based

individual during a certain period it is easier

Ainu collections, especially those created after

to date its artifacts more precisely. If the

the war by scholars and enthusiasts, are found

acquisition was based on some personal

in Japan. The Munro Collection is a good

relationship between the owner and the

example of a collection that remains in japan

collector, useful information may be pre¬

but was created by a researcher who was

served, but commercial transactions are

educated in Europe.

usually devoid of such data.
Comparing the contents of collections

Antique Stores

formed at different times reveals the transfor¬

and Other Collections

mations of Ainu society. A project by

Both historically and in the present day,

Professor Yoshinobu Kotani and others

cultural enthusiasts and antique stores have

revealed clearly that collections formed in

played a role in the formation of Ainu

the 1950s had many necklaces, swords, and

collections in japan. Some artifacts were

lacquerware, while collections formed in the

traded or sold from one enthusiast to another,

late nineteenth century had few such items.

but others were acquired by scholars and

The reason for such discrepancies is that

museums from these collectors. Although the

lacquerware, necklaces, and swords were

number of such collections is unknown, the

highly treasured by the Ainu people, and

total number of artifacts gathered may be

records written in the last half of the

assumed to be quite large. Many individual

nineteenth century confirm that people did

enthusiasts seem to pay attention mainly to

not readily relinquish such items. That these

the beauty of the objects or to focus on a

treasures could be collected in large volume

23/JAPANESE AINU COLLECTIONS

181

23.9 Lacquerware Tuki

later on may indicate that the Ainu people's

the items themselves using traditional patterns

and Ikupasuy

thinking about their traditions changed over

that have been passed down for generations in

Ainu rituals usually involve the offering
of sake, millet beer, or some other pre¬
cious libation to gods from lacquerware
cups and saucers, using the ikupasuy

time, or, perhaps more likely, that their

their home villages. Some artists utilize this

economic situations had worsened and they

body of knowledge to develop contemporary

were forced to sell their family treasures.

(prayer stick). The ikupasuy is pre¬

patterns and new traditions,- they visit muse¬
ums in order to study Ainu materials for such

sented in the manner seen here, rest¬

Collections in Use

purposes (Hokkaido Utari Kyokai 1994a).

ing across the cup with its “tongue” end

One mission of museums is to introduce the

Those museums with Ainu collections should

culture and history of the Ainu people

provide easy access to these people so that this

pointing to the left. The person perform¬
ing the ritual dips the pointed end into the

through the exhibition of their collections.

potential can be maximized. A new law,

to the venerated object at hand, allowing

Each year special exhibitions of Ainu objects

known as the Ainu Shinpo, was enacted in

drops to fall on the object, or sends

are held somewhere in Japan, often in

1997 to preserve and promote traditional

drops skyward to the gods. This set from

Hokkaido, and those museums that own Ainu

Ainu culture. As a result, the educational role

collections regularly exhibit some part of

of museums with Ainu collections in

liquid and then makes offering gestures

the Kono Collection includes both a tuki
and an ikupasuy with its own visual pun

them. Museums that do not own Ainu artifacts

Hokkaido is expected to increase. In recent

carving; it is one of the finest sets

borrow them from others in order to educate

years some museums, recognizing the need

known. (ACM)

the public about Ainu culture and history.

for Ainu collections to also be utilized in

Recently the number of Ainu exhibitions has

classrooms, have lent their materials to

—another tuki— and a tigerlike animal

increased. Asahikawa City Museum has

elementary schools. For instance, Hokkaido

planned and implemented a traveling exhibi¬

Takushoku Kinenkan produced replicas of

tion in cooperation with several museums in

hunting tools, clothes, and other items for

northern Hokkaido, and special exhibitions of

educational purposes, creating a model for

Ainu materials are being planned abroad.

students to actually use these tools without

Today there is a movement among
younger Ainu to learn traditional techniques
and crafts so that they can be passed on to
succeeding generations. Lectures, workshops,

182

endangering primary reference collections
(figs. 23.2, 23.3).

All ethnological collections, not just
Ainu collections, are valuable to both the

and both long- and short-term courses have

particular groups whose culture they docu¬

been held in various areas to enhance under¬

ment and to all peoples of the world because

standing of the Ainu culture and teach tradi¬

they show the paths by which humans

tional skills. These classes not only teach

develop. It is imperative that these collections

people to appreciate the technique and beauty

be utilized and preserved in the best possible

of Ainu crafts, they also inspire others to make

condition for use by generations to come.

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/ N. AOYAGI AND

K. DERI HA

T

he Ainu Museum Foundation,

partment. Such exhibitions and daily

established as the Shiraoi Founda¬

demonstrations of folk materials have been de¬

tion for the Preservation of the

signed to preserve and pass down Ainu culture.

Ainu Culture in 1976, is a compre¬

24/The Ainu
Museum
Foundation
Shigek.! Akino

The museum has about 6,000 items of

hensive cultural education facility whose

Ainu cultural materials and about three

mission is to preserve, research, study, and

hundred specimens from minority groups of

pass on the Ainu culture. The facility incorpo¬

the northern regions, including the Nivkhi,

rates an Ainu kotaii (fig. 24.1), a reproduction

Ul’ta, Saami, and Inuit, usually about eight

of a traditional village that was formerly

hundred specimens are on display at any

located in the city of Shiraoi, it was moved to

given time. The museum also owns about five

its present location in 1965 as a social

hundred audiotape recordings used in oral-

organization run by Shiraoi Tour Consultant

history research,- about two hundred video¬

Inc. The Shiraoi Foundation was established

tapes of various ceremonies held by the Ainu

in 1975 when this company changed its focus

Museum,- about 150 Ainu-e (illustrations of the

from tourism to cultural education.

Ainu),- and about 6,000 books and documen¬

The first chairman of the foundation,
Takeo Yamamaru, enriched the institution by

tary records.
The exhibition hall (fig. 24.2) is divided

collecting traditional Ainu artifacts. In 1984

into sections with different themes showing

the Ainu Folk Museum was opened to the

related materials. Themes include: The World

public as an exhibition space for Ainu cultural

of Gods, Gods and People, Hunting, Blessing

property, both tangible (material culture and

of the Earth, Eating, Clothing, Housing, Life
of the Ainu, History of the People, and
Neighboring Peoples.
As part of its mission to preserve and
pass on Ainu culture, the museum conducts
traditional Ainu ceremonies including iyomante
(sending back the spirit of a bear), iwakte
(sending back the spirit of human imple¬
ments), chip-sanke (a boat-launching cer¬
emony), and shinnurappa (a memorial service
for ancestors) and demonstrates traditional
handcrafts including weaving on looms, mak¬
ing straw mats and traditional clothing, and
embroidering Ainu patterns,- these activities
serve to enlighten and popularize Ainu culture
among the visiting public (fig. 24.3).

Research and Study
The establishment of the museum in 1975
coincided with a resurgence of interest in
traditional Ainu culture, and arts and science
24.1

The Ainu Museum in Shiraoi

The Ainu Museum at Shiraoi has been
in operation since 1976 and is now

artifacts) and intangible (songs, dance, oral

professionals have been encouraged to use its

literature), and as a center for academic

resources in their research and study. A

research. In 1990 the corporation was renamed

primary research activity is the work being

The Ainu Museum Foundation, recognizing

done by staff oral historians: there are about

education and preservation of Ainu

that the museum, established and run by the

five hundred recordings of several fuchi

culture is met by displaying Ainu arti¬

Ainu, had become its primary focus.

incorporated as the Ainu Museum
Foundation, its dual function of public

facts and staging performances
within the context of an Ainu kotan
(village), which is open to the public.
Building collections (such as the recent

The museum's design utilizes outdoor

(respected elder women) including Suteno
Oda, Matsuko Kawakami, Harushia Sonoura,

spaces and is divided into modern and tradi¬

Shin Kawakami—all deceased since their

tional zones of an Ainu kotan (village), includ¬

stories were transcribed,- the late Masayoshi

additions of the Kodama and Tanaka

ing several restored houses (chise), food

Tochigi ekashi (respected male elder) also

Collections) and archiving oral tradi¬

storehouses (pu), bear cages (heperset), and

recorded his recollections of traditional Ainu

tions are other programs that fulfill its

several boats (chip). The history and culture

life. These fuchi and ekashi lived at the museum

mission. (AMS)

of the Ainu are explained by trained educators,-

for periods of time as resident artists, demon¬

there are also public demonstrations of Ainu

strating their traditional handcrafts,- their

folk dance by the museum's Oral Tradition De¬

techniques were preserved on video, thus

24/AINU

MUSEUM SHIRAOI

183

enhancing research and study materials.

the iyomante ceremonies held in 1989 and

The results have been published in the three

1990 have been made available to scholars

volumes of Ainu and Nature Series and the

and the public in published reports.

four volumes of Oral History Series.
A second research program seeks to

Other such ceremonies, including a
boat-launching ceremony and a memorial ser¬

understand Ainu culture comprehensively

vice for the ancestors are held every year in

through the museum's collection. Several Japa¬

April and in August, respectively. Ceremonies

nese researchers are contributing to this study

for sending back the spirit of man-made

in addition to museum employees in the Arts

objects or celebrating the completion of a

and Sciences Department. This group conducts

new house are held whenever the appropriate

various research projects and holds seminars

situations occur, for example, when disposing

and symposia at the museum and overseas.

of museum equipment or when construction
of a new chise is completed. These traditional

Preserving and Passing on

24.2

Ainu Exhibits

Ainu ceremonies are not demonstrated to the

Ainu Culture

public: while this deviates from the museum's

An important feature of the Ainu Museum is

education mission, these activities essentially

its programs to preserve and pass on Ainu

serve as a way for employees and Ainu museum

culture, for example, the demonstration of

associates to preserve and pass down Ainu

Ainu folk dances to visitors (fig. 24.4). Sixteen

culture. For the time being, ceremonies such

traditional and modern Ainu artifacts to

dances, designated as National Important

as the iyomante, which involves the killing of a

the public. (AMS)

Intangible Cultural Properties in 1984, are the

bear, are kept private because this important

24.3

focus of this effort,- three to four such dances

Ainu ritual is poorly understood by the pub¬

are demonstrated to visitors daily.

lic,- however, with the recent passage of the

Cultural education is an important activity
of the Ainu Museum. Interpretive displays
of the museum’s collections introduce

Iyomante Ceremony

As part of its mission to preserve and
pass on Ainu culture, the museum

This preservation program also includes

Ainu Shinpo of 1997, the public image of

conducts traditional Ainu ceremonies
including iyomante (sending back the

conducting different types of rituals. Since the

the Ainu has begun to change, and we hope

spirit of a bear), iwakte (sending back

Meiji era began in 1868, many Ainu tradi¬

to share these ceremonies with wider audi¬

the spirit of human implements), chip-

tional ceremonies have disappeared because

ences as appreciation of our traditions con¬

sanke (a boat-launching ceremony),

of cultural changes and the assimilation policy

tinues to grow.

and shinnurappa (a memorial service

of the Japanese government. Despite the

for ancestors). Some of these ceremo¬

logistical difficulties of carrying out tradi¬

Cultural Exchange

sented only for the Ainu people and are

tional ceremonies, the museum has frequently

Since the establishment of the Ainu Museum,

not open to the public. (AMS)

held sending-back ceremonies and memorial

we have initiated an active exchange program

services for Ainu ancestors for the purpose of

with minority native peoples and their

nies, such as the iyomante, are pre¬

18 4

reviving, preserving, and passing on tradi¬

museums in foreign countries. Our exchange

tional culture (fig. 24.5). The iyomante—a

with the Finnish Saami people is especially

ceremony for sending back the spirit of a

active: in 1984 we cooperated as a sister-

bear—was held seven times in the past, most

museum with the Saami Museum of Inari in

recently in March 1996. Documentation of

Lapland, and staff and researchers made

MUSEUM

COLLECTIONS/ S. AKINO

24.4, 24.5 Ainu Dance
and Ceremony

Dancing and demonstration of tradi¬
tional handcrafts—weaving elm-bark

(attush) garments on backstrap horns,
making straw mats, sewing traditional
clothing, and embroidering—help to
popularize Ainu culture among the visit¬
ing public. (AMS)

several visits. We also developed a memoran¬

the Kodama Collection, comprising 2,263

dum on museum exchange in August 1993

items, which is about half of the 5,000 items

with the Sakhalin State Museum and the

Kodama collected (the Hakodate City

Nogliki Town Museum in Sakhalin, Russia,

Museum is also a repository). These materi¬

and we invited members of that region's

als, assembled by the late Dr. Sakuzaemon

minority group, the Nivkhi, to Shiraoi.

Kodama, a famous professor at Hokkaido

Moreover, we have active exchanges with

University, comprise one of the premier

Taiwanese native people who were invited

collections of Ainu objects in the world.

to the Ainu Museum in October 1993.

Since the museum's opening in 1984, the

In December 1997 we in turn were invited

Kodama Collection has been stored here and

to the International Native Culture and

has been shown occasionally in temporary

Art Festival, commemorating the found¬

exhibits. In April 1998 it was donated

ing of the Administrative Committee of

permanently to the museum by the owner,

Native Taiwanese.

Mari Kodama, Professor Kodama's daughter.

Ainu folk dances have been performed
overseas five times: in Finland, Sweden,
Norway, and Denmark in 1984,- Finland and
Sweden in 1989,- England in 1995,- Finland
and Denmark in 1996,- and Taiwan in 1997.
Ainu artifacts were exhibited at the Helsinki
National Museum and the Art Museum of

The museum also owns two other
important collections. The Ryoshoji Collec¬
tion of 181 items was collected by the chief
priest of a temple in Boda, Hokkaido, and
includes important materials such as a sapanpe
(a man's ceremonial headdress) made from
the mandible of a shark. The Tanaka Collec-

Umea University, Sweden, in 1984,- the
Sakhalin State Library and the Khabarovsk
Regional Museum in 1987; and in the Arctic
Circle Center in connection with Lapland
University, Finland, in 1994. These activi¬
ties contribute greatly to mutual cultural
exchanges and enhance understanding of
the Ainu people overseas.

tion, which includes 154 objects acquired by
Mr. Chuzaburo Tanaka of Aomori city, was
sold to the museum in 1985. All of these
collections are in storage and are available
for research and display in exhibitions in the
museum and for loan to special exhibitions
staged by other museums.

Paintings
The Ainu Collections

The museum owns 157 of the paintings

A collection of about 6,000 Ainu pieces forms
the foundation of the Ainu Museum's hold¬
ings, including both historical materials as
well as ceremonial equipment and handcrafts
made by museum employees and resident
artists. Among the historical collections, the
largest and most important is a portion of

known as Ainu-e, which illustrate Ainu

24/AINU MUSEUM SHIRAOI

manners and customs from the late Edo era
to the beginning of the Meiji era (see T.
Sasaki, this volume). The paintings are
highly valued historical materials, produced
by Japanese artists, that document Ainu life
and culture. Among the museum's holdings

185

24.6 Sun Visor

are The Ainu Garments and The Scene of Ezo
Country, eighteenth-century scrolls by Teiryo
Kodama, and mid-nineteenth-century works,
The Ainu Sailing Out Fishing and The Tangle
Collection of the Ezo by Byozan Hirasawa, all wellknown pieces.
Although still a relatively young organi¬
zation, the Ainu Museum Foundation has
established a strong research and public
education program. It has the support of the
Ainu community and maintains a balance
between its cultural preservation and transmis¬
sion programs and its research and popular
museum activities. Its staff are known increas¬
ingly to the international professional museum
community and to national and international
native organizations. We are particularly
proud to be active participants in Ainu.- Spirit of a
Northern People through loans of objects and
Ainu-e, and through the expert advice and
skillful reconstructions of an Ainu boat model
and chise, as well as catalogue contributions
made by our curator Masahiro Nomoto.

The Sakuzaemon Kodama Collection is
the most extensive and important of
the Ainu Museum's collections. This
sun visor {sikahkah), which seems to
have been used only by the Sakhalin
Ainu, was worn with the flap over the
wearer's eyes. It was used to protect
the eyes of older Ainu and those who
had eye problems. (AMS 60542)
24.7 Masahiro Nomoto Begins the
Smithsonian Ship Model

During the spring and summer of 1998,
Masahiro Nomoto, a curator of the Ainu
Museum at Shiraoi, took up residence in
Washington, D.C., to build a model chip
(boat) and a chise (house) for use in the
Smithsonian’s Ainu exhibition. A master
woodcarver, Nomoto is seen here begin¬
ning the task of reducing a huge North¬
west Coast yellow cedar log at the
Smithsonian’s Office of Exhibit Central.

186

MUSEUM COLLECTIONS/ S. A KINO

T

he making of motion pictures is

generally said to have begun in
1895 when the Lumiere brothers
presented a "cinematograph”—a

25/The Ainu in
Ethnographic
Films

way to project films—at a cafe in Paris. Since
then, anthropologists around the world have
used film extensively to record ethnographic
cultures, and in the autumn of 1897 the Ainu
were recorded on film for the first time. This
film and others from this era tell us much

Kazuo Okada

about early Ainu life that is not recorded in
written documentation. Comparison of these
with later films reveals much about changing
Ainu life and the filmmakers who produced
this work,- they show how anthropological
interests have changed over time and how
Ainu culture has been presented to the wider
world. Even though Ainu films never became
popular, like Asen Balikci's Netsilik series,
Robert Flaherty's Nanook of the North, or the
many commercially oriented Hollywood films

25.1

Beautiful Japan, Take One

The classic film Beautiful Japan
(1918) contains some of the earliest

produced on Alaskan Eskimo themes, the film
materials that have accumulated over the
years on the Ainu constitute a sizable body of

images of the Ainu in a village setting,
in this scene a bear being reared for
the iyomante festival is being put back

material that is a valuable resource for
research, public education, and, increasingly,

into a log cage after enjoying exercise,

for Ainu culture preservation projects. This

feeding, and entertainment with his

essay concentrates primarily on the history of

Ainu hosts. (HFSA/SI)

filmmaking on the Ainu from both ethno¬
graphic and popular perspectives.

The Earliest Ainu Films
At the end of 1896 the Lumiere company
dispatched Constant Girel, a projectionist and
25/ AINU

IN ETHNOGRAPHIC FILMS

cameraman, to Japan to introduce the

Girel's film on the Ainu was shown in

cinematograph. Girel arrived in Japan in

the summer of 1 898, first in Osaka with the

January of 1897 and introduced his cinemato¬

title Dances by Men and Women of the Hokkaido

graph in Osaka in February, in Kyoto in

Ainu, and then in Nagoya as Bear Dance of

March, and later in Tokyo. Girel had plans to

Hokkaido Ainu Aborigines. These were the first

make seventeen films in different regions of

public screenings of an Ainu film.

Japan,- two of these were to record the Ainu,

At the beginning of the twentieth

and in October 1 897 he arrived in Hokkaido

century, before World War I, another film on

to film them. Although it is unclear in which

the Ainu was produced by professor

village the filming took place, Girel, with the

Frederick Starr, an anthropologist at the

help of French missionaries and others,

University of Chicago. Starr, who brought

succeeded in shooting two Ainu dances, one

several Ainu to America for the Louisiana

performed by men and the other by women.

Purchase Centennial Exposition in 1904, had

While the length of each recording is less

an assistant film and photograph the Ainu in

than one minute, they are marvelous. In a

Hokkaido. The film is said to have been

letter dated October 18, Girel wrote that he

photographed in the Saru River region, but

had taken a train at the port of Muroran,

little can be confirmed about this particular

traveled for about six miles (ten kilometers)

work because its present whereabouts are

through primeval forests, and then proceeded

unknown. (HADDON, an Internet database,

a further thirty-seven miles (sixty kilometers)

mentions an Anthropological Study of Early

on horseback.

Motion Pictures at the Department of
Social Anthropology, Oxford Llniversity. It
states that there was a film about the Ainu
shown in America in 1912 with German
subtitles, and it is currently stored in
England's National Archives of Motion
Pictures,- whether this is the picture made
by Starr or not has yet to be determined.)
Benjamin Buloski, an itinerant Ameri¬
can lecturer, visited Japan from 1918 to
1919, and with the cooperation of the
National Japan Railways and the Japan
Travel Bureau, traveled to various regions
on a special train that carried his film crew
and equipment. His film Beautiful Japan,
produced during this visit, includes a scene
of the bear-sending ceremony (iyomante)
performed by the Shiraoi Ainu. Judging
from the fact that the footage does not
include a scene of a bear actually being sent
to the godland, it would seem that the film
crew asked the Ainu people to stage the
ceremonial situation for the camera. Buloski
presented his film to the American ambas¬

25.2 Beautiful Japan, Take Two

We greeted the Ainu people with souve¬

This strip shows a group of Ainu in cer¬
emonial costumes dancing at one of

nirs, sweet potatoes and fruit. Thanks to
our interpreter, who had a good rapport

the many festivals held to honor and

with the Ainu, they showed us their

the Smithsonian's Human Studies Film

thank the gods for their providence.

dances willingly. There were two numbers:
"Dance of Birds" [Crane Dance] performed

Archives (HSFA) of the Department of

(HSFA/SI)

sador to Japan, who later donated it to the
Smithsonian Institution. It is now stored in

Anthropology.

only by women, and "Dance of Warriors,"
performed by men 1 he following day, we

188

felt extremely sad saying goodbye to those

The Earliest Japanese Films

beautiful, dignified people. They are
disappearing, gradually but surely, as they

While opinions differ as to who first began
filming for anthropological purposes in

yield to the Yamato [Japanese] race.
Civilization and western cultures outrun

Japan, some would cite Ryuzo Torii. He left

things native—this must be indeed a

many remarkable still pictures of various

struggle for existence.

ethnic groups, but whether or not he utilized

AINU "DISCOVERY" / K. OKADA

ethnic groups, but whether or not he
utilized motion pictures is uncertain. A
snapshot by Torii of the Takushoku Interna¬
tional Exposition, which was held in Ueno,
Tokyo, in 1912, shows actual houses of the
Hokkaido and Sakhalin Ainu as well as a
projection room called Kankokan. In the
room, a film was shown that documented
the situation of the Sakhalin Ainu and
discussed the influence of Russian culture on
other territories newly acquired by Japan
during the Russo-Japanese war. The present
location of this film is also unknown.
Of existing films, the earliest by a
Japanese scholar was produced by Professor
Saburo Yada, a zoologist in the Agriculture
Department of the Imperial University of
Hokkaido and head of the department's
museum. The film, called Life of the Shiraoi
Ainu, was made in 1925 for presentation at
the Pan-Pacific Academic Conference held
in 1926. This work includes scenes of
women drawing water from a new well in
their village,- the transportation of goods,male and female elders greeting one
another,- attush weaving,- marriage ceremo¬
nies,- treatment of illness,- funerals,- the bear¬
sending ceremony,- and salmon fishing.
Yada showed this film at the conference
during a seminar on the Ainu held by
Keimeikai, an academic organization.
Originally he had planned to present his
reasons for making the film, but due to time
constraints he was not able to deliver his
prepared speech (which was, however,
entered into the seminar record),- unfortu¬
nately there exists only a brief explanation of
the picture. What is noteworthy is that Yada's
film did not record real Ainu life at the time
but was a reconstruction of a more traditional
lifestyle from an earlier period In the 1920s
Ainu culture was undergoing drastic changes,
and the traditional ways of life were fading
away, or in some instances were already gone.
Yada expressed surprise when he discovered
that the Ainu folkcrafts housed in museums
were no longer being used by the Ainu.
The original copy of the film was kept
at the University of Hokkaido, but the
funeral segment was lost during the chaos of
the post World War II period. In the 1990s,
however, an English version of the lost
footage was discovered, and the author of
this article, with the help of others, restored
it and converted it and the remaining original
to a video format. Subtitles in Japanese and

189

English were added and the film is now
available in a user-friendly form.
Neil Gordon Munro, a Scottish doctor and
amateur archaeologist who was naturalized in

dedication ceremony for a monument that
the Nibutani people had built at the site of
Munro's former residence. The actions of
those involved with the reediting of Munro's

Japan in the early 1900s, began studying the Ainu

films are questionable by today's standards,

in the 1920s. He visited Nibutani frequently,

even if they may have meant well.

becoming a resident in 1930,- he died in the village

1 his author tried unsuccessfully to

in 1942. Munro began filming the Ainu with a

locate the original positive print. When 1

grant from the Rockefeller Foundation, obtained

learned that the editors had not used the

through the help of supporters at the British Royal

actual print that had been rediscovered but

Anthropological Institute (RA1). He completed his

instead had made duplicate negatives for

first work, Iyomante, depicting the bear-sending

editing, I began searching for the original

ceremony, in 1931. In 1933 and 1934 he recorded

print but so far have been unable to find it.

Uepotara, documenting a prayer for recovery from

The prints of Uepotara and Chise-nomi were

illness, and Chise-nomi, a house-consecrating ritual.

found, however, in the film can containing

These were exceptional products, with high

the film Life of the Shiraoi Ainu by Professor

clarity and recorded in 35mm format (although

Saburo Yada. With the support of Shigeru

the copy Munro sent to the RA1 was a 16mm

Kayano, a prominent Ainu culture-bearer

print). Iyomante was produced in the style of an

whose grandmother was an informant of

academic paper, with the use of captions and

Munro's in Nibutani, Uepotara and Chise-nomi

diagrams and detailed comments on items used

were restored and converted to a video

during the ceremony,- the explanatory section

format in 1992 and organized to follow the

accounted for one-third of the film.

various stages of Munro's work. Both videos

While Iyomante was a completed motion
picture, Uepotara and Chise-nomi were unfin¬

have Japanese and English subtitles.
In 1936 Tetsuo Inukai, a zoologist at

ished, but Munro did show these films at the

the University of Hokkaido, filmed Iyomante,

University of Hokkaido and other places. He

a bear-sending ceremony performed by

died in the chaotic situation at the outbreak

Kaneto Kawamura, an Ainu elder known for

of World War II and his works disappeared

his contribution to the preservation of the

under murky circumstances. In the 1960s,

traditional culture of the Chikabumi Ainu

however, a 35mm positive print of Iyomante

(Chikabumi is now part of the suburbs of

was discovered and was reedited, focusing

Asahikawa, Hokkaido). The movies of the

particularly on the bear-sending ceremony.

bear-sending ceremony as filmed in three

The editors of this work had no relationship

regions—Shiraoi, Nibutani, and

or contact with the RAI, and they assigned

Chikabumi — reveal interesting similarities

the distribution rights of the English version

and differences in the ritual.

to the Media Extension Center of the
University of California, Berkeley.
This action by the editors created an
uncomfortable situation for all those con¬

Ainu culture must have often been re¬
corded cinematically during this period, but
as is the case with many films of traditional
cultures in other regions, few are extant.

cerned: because the RAI believed that the
16mm print sent to them was the original,

19 o

Production Agency Films

they were offended by the editors' action

In the postwar period, documentation of the

and failure to seek permissions. The Ainu

Ainu continued, if sporadically. For example,

were also confused, for although it was clear

Sakuzaemon Kodama, a doctor and professor

that Munro had filmed in Nibutani, the

at the medical school of the University of

editors used as sound effects yukar, oral

Tokyo, was known for his collection of Ainu

narratives set in rhythm, which had been

material culture, and he also edited an

recorded in the Shizonai region. In the mid-

educational film entitled Ainu Clothes that was

1960s, many Ainu people in Nibutani, both

funded by the Education Committee of

young and old, who had appeared in the film

Hokkaido. Shigeru Kayano and his wife

were still alive, but none of them were

appeared in this film. Following the growing

contacted by the editors. It was not until

availability of color film in the 1950s, a

1975, more than ten years after the restora¬

growing number of documentaries were made

tion of the film, that the Nibutani Ainu saw

by production companies and professionals.

it for the first time, when it was shown at the

In the early stage of this period, the Ainu

AINU "DISCOVERY" / K. OKADA

continued to play a role as subjects and

teaching the Ainu language to Ainu children

"cooperators," but they had very little control

in Nibutani, filmed Tonotokamuy, which

over their depiction in these films.

documents the sacred sake-making per¬

The Collaboration Era

simple yet refreshing: instead of inserting

In the 1970s the circumstances surrounding

voice-over narration, Kayano added his own

the filming of Ainu began to change gradu¬

comments as he shot. This method, in which

formed by his parents. The film's style is

ally, and Ainu such as Shigeru Kayano became

the camera operator and the elders interview

actively involved in film production. In

one another, provides a fresh approach.

addition, some artists stressed the importance

Perhaps the most important thing to consider

of communicating with their subjects instead

is that such modest attempts at documenta¬

of simply pointing a camera at them.

tion, as shown by Kayano, can now be made

Tadayoshi Himeda and other staff of the

in every Ainu community. At the same time,

Ethnic Culture Film Research Institute

it is vital that old films about the Ainu be

produced many films in a long-term collabo¬

collected, copied, preserved, and made

ration with Shigeru Kayano. Their high-

available to the public. It is important that

quality works included Wedding (1974),

not only researchers but also Ainu interested

Building a House (1974), Bear-Sending Ceremony

in preserving their own culture have open

(1977), Children's Play (1978/1984), and Canoe

access to these valuable materials.

Making (1978). Although these films were

Ainu culture is not only of interest to the

produced by Japanese artists, the views of the

Ainu,- most Japanese today also agree that

Ainu are definitely reflected in their work.

Ainu culture is noteworthy and precious, and

The ongoing activities of the Ainu

even those who do not hold it in high regard

Intangible Culture Preservation Group,

or who consider it only of historical interest

headquartered in Sapporo since 1976, should

acknowledge its importance. Hopefully the

be noted here. With a grant from the Hok-

1997 Ainu Shinpo will encourage popular

kaido government's Agency for Cultural

recognition and respect for Ainu history,

Affairs, funds produced from New Year's

culture, and language and understanding of its

postcards sales, and other sources, one or two

important role in the history of Japan and the

films have been produced every year. While

Sea of Okhotsk region. Footage—old and

the gap between the funding needed to

modern—of the Ainu will certainly be

document Ainu culture and the amount of

important in the cultural revitalization and

grant money actually awarded is substantial,

public reevaluation process that is now

they nevertheless manage to continue

underway. It is also likely to become of

production. Their accumulated work indicates

increasing interest to the wider world commu¬

that continuity holds power, for in these films

nity that has developed a strong interest in

the elders of each region, who have since

ethnographic films, as demonstrated by

passed away, convey the traditions they

enthusiastic responses to Ainu footage

inherited to the younger generations of today.

presented in recent film festivals throughout

Ainu Filmmaking and the Future

ethnographic and documentary films is not

By the 1980s anyone with a video camera

large, it has the capacity of providing a firm

the world. Although the corpus of Ainu

could make a film, and such activities con¬

foundation for research and education projects

tinue to accelerate. Properly organizing what

and is increasing rapidly today through local

has already been shot, however, is not an easy

media and private efforts. This is none too

task, but the fact remains that filming can

soon, for many of the knowledgeable elders

now be done by anyone. Many Ainu families

are passing away. Film is the media of choice

possess video cameras and thus are potential

for documenting and promoting cultural

filmmakers—while there are no known

preservation and retention in the modern day,-

professional filmmakers among the Ainu,

it will certainly be an important resource and

there are many amateurs.

instrument both for the Ainu people and the

Shigeru Kayano, who is committed to

25/AINU

IN ETHNOGRAPHIC FILMS

wider public for years to come.

191

'

msi

;

-

Iv

VI \iV)\V

T

he word kamuy (god) in the

Ainu language is a generic term
for both physical and immaterial
entities on the earth who possess

26/ Kamuy:
Gods You Can
Argue With

abilities superior to those of man. Specifically,
gods can be animals, plants, minerals, or other
geographical and natural phenomena that
have a place on earth.
Humans can neither fly nor stay
underwater for a long time without equip¬

Hisakazu Fujimura

ment, nor can they live without food and air.
Man cannot create fire without a device, but
he can extinguish fire with water or a fire
extinguisher when fire spreads. Even if man
can put out fire, it is not considered in the
power of humans to extinguish fire because
they simply make use of the power (spirits) of
water or the fire extinguisher, which exceed
human capabilities and thus are gods. When a

< Shimochi, Grand Chieftain of Atsukishi

fire becomes too fierce for humans to control,

1843 copy by Teiki Kojima after Hakyo

they cannot do anything but wait for it to die

Kakizaki's work, Portraits of Ezo Chief¬

down on its own. This is interpreted as the

tains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

anger of the fire god being so enormous that
the gods of the water and the extinguisher

26.1

Inaw. Messengers to the Gods

Ainu gods had different personalities,
like people do. Prayers were directed
to them with the assistance of inaw,

cannot appease its rage. When the fire loses
its force, it is thought that the fire god has
finally calmed down.

willow sticks that were carved into

The Ainu's concept of gods extends to

different shapes representing birds

humans and things that man produces, such

according to the particular god that

as tools and utensils. Humans die, and

was being addressed or the cer¬
emony in which they were to be used.

likewise, things end their life cycles,- after the

This photograph was taken in 1950

end of their lives, the spirits of both humans

by Ted Banks III. (MKB, courtesy of

and things become gods. If the spirits of

Edmund Carpenter)

living entities (gods, humans, and things) are

26.2

referred to as live spirits, then the spirits after
death or a life cycle are considered dead
spirits. The difference between live and dead
spirits is as follows: the gods, humans, and
things are integrated beings of form and
spirit, and the spirit activates the function of
each being. Take, for example, a human. The
flesh is the container and the soul a medium
to activate his or her function as man or
woman,- the body and soul coexist with each
other. Other beings, both material or
immaterial, exist in this same way (Fujimura
1982,-Obayashi 1997).
Humans and animals die,- plants wither,rivers and lakes dry up,- volcanoes go extinct,and things end their life cycles. At this stage,

Inaw-*Carving Tool

their spirits leave their containers (fig. 26.1).

Men were responsible for communi¬
cating with the gods, which they did

In the case of a human being at death, the

with the assistance of inaw. The art

soul departs from the body, yet the soul is

of carving inaw was time-consuming

considered immortal even after flesh decays

and required both a steady hand and

and bones return to the soil. The spirits are

a sturdy specialized tool.

thought to repeat themselves and reincarnate

(AMNH 70/4156)

according to their specific species and gender,
so for instance, a man will always return as a
man and a female cat as a female cat.
The Ainu people believe that dead
spirits live in deep space. These spirits are
thought to depart "this world" (the earth) for
"that world" (where spirits travel to after death
on the earth, i.e., the next world), which is the
same as "this world." However, those who
cannot cut their attachment to this world or
who bear a grudge or demand a proper spirit¬
sending ritual (figs. 26.3, 26.4) remain floating
around on earth instead of moving on,- when
they find an appropriate person, they try to
fulfill their wishes using that individual's body.
26 / KAMUY: AINU

GODS

19 3

Thus, that person becomes possessed by the

short-tempered while others are kind. These

spirit. The Ainu people believe that gods have

examples illustrate the characteristics of spirits.
In the same manner, the things that humans

this supernatural power.
Once possession takes place, it is the
beginning of a tragedy for the possessed and

depending on their intended use and the

those related to him, for this dead spirit is

preference of their creators, and the products

often considered to be an evil spirit. There is

that satisfy the users tend to live a long life and

always a man, however, who can free the

are sometimes kept as tokens when their life

possessed,- this person is either an expert on

cycles have ended. On the other hand, some

religious rituals, or, even if he has no knowl¬

products are discarded or destroyed before the

edge of rites, an earnest and reliable indi¬

end of their life. Humans generally are free to

vidual. Through the use of attentive, proper,

treat things in any way they like,- if, however,

and calming rituals, this person relieves the

they become arrogant and abusive, they will

dead of their resentment and attachment so

have to pay a price. Environmental problems

that they can depart for the next world with

and various accidents of nature are counterat¬

peace of mind. No matter how violent and

tacks by things against humans and can kill

harmful the spirit, sincere and appropriate

them. Gods and things can live within their

rituals appease the evil mind and help reveal

environment independent of others, a feature

the spirit's original good nature.

unique to them. Carnivorous animals eat the

Gods, humans, and things are all

26.3, 26.4

Carving Inaw

The process of carving inaw captured
the attention of Japanese Ainu-e artist

meat of others,- herbivorous animals feed on

essentially good-natured. Nonetheless, as they

plants,- water becomes rain, snow, or ice,- water

grow older, their minds become complex and

vapor creates clouds—these are activities in

sometimes create trouble,- when they cannot

the gods' world. Humans utilize the gifts of

control their minds, they tend to attack

gods and things but gods do not need gifts

Shimanojo Murakami, who depicted it in
his Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood in the

create have diverse shapes and characters

others. If this uncontrollable mind is treated

from humans. In human history, man has

early nineteenth century. One hundred

while still alive on the earth, the person can

rarely contributed to gods,- what might appear

years later Bronislaw Pilsudski captured

go to the next world as a good-hearted god.

as human offerings to the gods are really favors

a similar scene with his camera as

In contrast, if a human cannot solve his

returned (for instance, the bear ceremony).

Sakhalin Ainu prepared for an iyomante
ceremony. (HML; NAA 87-5542).

1 94

problems by the time of his death, he will

The relationship among gods, humans,
and things is that the life of humans is

become a god with an evil mind.
The spirit is also believed to be the source

supported by things provided by gods,- thus,

that determines species, gender, character, and

humans are dependent on the other two and

ability (spiritual power) in a particular being.

cannot live without them. In a sense, the

The spirit, in the form of a human life, grows

weakest being on the earth is the human, and

and ages. In addition, the spirit's natural

the only talent humans are furnished with

abilities exert considerable influence on the

that exceeds the ability of gods and things is

formation of character and ability in the

their ability with language and rituals (figs.

person,- this explains why, for example, some

26.5, 26.6). Humans utilize such skills and act

people are good at math,- why others have

as the medium between the gods and things,

aptitude for languages,- and why some are

trying to create harmony among the three,

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H

FUJIMURA

26.5

Ikupasuy

Although there are many types of

inaw, the form of each type was stan¬
dardized. Men’s personal ikupasuy
(prayer sticks), on the other hand, were
highly individualistic and artistically
diverse. Recurrent themes and motifs,
such as geometric, floral, and fishscale
designs, ayus and morew (whorl) pat¬
terns, and fish motifs (all seen here)

which is thought to be the first step in

gods also relax, following the example of the

creating a peaceful world. An Ainu saying

humans, and then the evil gods take advan¬

states, "Because of humans (and their efforts),

tage of the humans' unguarded mind and try

gods (including things) can exist in peace,-

to harm them. Sometimes the gods, who are

because of gods' thoughtful arrangements,

supposed to protect humans, instead hurt

humans can live a peaceful life."

them as a punishment for their careless

This relationship can be explained using
the concept of duty and rights: the gods have a

behaviors,- when this happens, the human
realizes that his laziness invited punishment.

duty to protect humans but they retain the right

Regretting his wrong behavior, he conducts a

to be compensated for this protection,- humans

ceremony to express his regret and appease

ikupasuy. (BMS C18761, C18764,

have the right to receive the gods' protection

the anger of the god. Even if the ceremonies

C18770, C14724a and C13467)

yet are obligated to return their favors. In other

are performed properly and sincerely,

words, gods, including things, and humans are

however, it is not certain that the gods will

equal and maintain their existence through

accept the apologies, for such judgments will

mutual cooperation.

be made collectively based on the dreams and

are found, but no two specimens are
alike. Humans are never carved on

Humans are not flawless. They are quite

feelings of those participating in the ritual. If

self-indulgent, and once things are going

the gods do not accept the apologies, even

smoothly they relax and are apt to become

more courteous rituals will have to take place.

lazy. When this situation continues, certain

If the content of the ceremonies becomes too

26 / KAMUY.- AINU CODS

195

26.6

Ikupasuy Stories

The imagery on some ikupasuy seems
to be narrative. For instance, the juxta¬

complex for ordinary people, shamans are

body, but sometimes the spirit tries to

called upon to read the god's mind.

return. Imagine a situation where a person

If humans conduct proper rituals and are

is bedridden for a long time from serious

position of a boat and a whale (bottom)
suggests commemoration of a hunt or a

grateful for the gods' protection — from cer¬

illness or aging,- it is obvious to everyone

prayer to ensure a successful future

tain harmful situations such as natural disas¬

that death is near. The Ainu describe this

hunt. The carving on the upper speci¬

ters, epidemics, poor harvests, abnormal

situation as one where a person has entered

men has the form of an animal, but it is

weather—but are still plagued by problems,

the preparation stage of being a god (dead

they can protest and argue with the gods.

spirit). When the person's condition wors¬

too abstract to identify further. (BMS
C13466, C12988)

Occasionally, they get rid of some gods, and

ens, he may begin talking about matters after

gods can be compelled through the fire god¬

his death—for instance, a will—and by so

dess to provide a detailed explanation of the

doing he is notifying the people around him

specific incident in question. Humans can

that he is dying. Once he loses conscious¬

demand deprivation of the god's status, purge

ness the spirit is thought to begin departing

it from the fellowship of other gods, take back

the body, and his delirious talk and delu¬

offerings they provided, and ask for appropri¬

sions are regarded as conversation with

ate compensation for damages. The god who

people who come to greet him, such as

is sued must apologize to the accuser in a dream

grandparents, parents, brothers, and sisters.

and pledge future protection. Sometimes the

Dying people who are highly sensitive can

god asks for forgiveness through shamans.
A god, even though the most powerful
entity, must ask for forgiveness from humans

including physical manifestions of deceased

because gods (especially the dead spirits) are

people, the sound of rain and tinkling of

supposed to follow the words of man. The

metal, or light.

words of man (word spirits) become absolute
power and can bind the dead spirits,- the words

Sick people who open their eyes wide
and stare at the sky are thought to be looking

become a curse. The time required for a god's

for the entrance to the next world,- when such

reincarnation, unlike for humans, is very short.

movements stop and the patient ceases to

Human words can eternally bind gods, unethi¬

respond to the voices of others, this indicates

cal humans, and things, who are released only

that his departure from his body is imminent.

by the words of those who initially bound

Breathing may stop, but only when the heart

them. The words of living humans, therefore,

stops is he considered dead, for the spirits

are feared by the dead spirits.
Where do the dead souls—spirits who

196

identify these people, and sometimes they
can also see and hear extraordinary things,

that grow in the container—the body—are
believed to reside in the heart, and they leave

died in this world — go? Death for a human

the heart by passing through holes in the

is the state when the soul departs from the

body such as the mouth, nostrils, earholes,

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H. FUJIMURA

eyes, navel, and anus. Most dead spirits depart

although it cannot communicate there

through the mouth and nostrils.

because it can only speak the language of

A spirit that has left the body may try

this world, the one it had previously inhab¬

to return to it. This happens when the spirit

ited. How the life of this baby develops is

feels uncertain about its destination. When it

preconditioned by the way it lived in the

succeeds in returning to the body, the

previous world. After its life in the next

memory of its journey is a near-death experi¬

world is completed, it will be born again on

ence,- at this point, if the body is moved even

earth through the same process.

slightly the spirit could determine that body

The Ainu people believe that one's flesh

to be someone else's and look for its own

and bones are nothing but the container of

body. If it finds a corpse similar in shape, it

the spirit, which exists for the purpose of

may revive in it, so a dead body is not

living one's life and will be abandoned after

supposed to be moved for about twenty-four

this use. Because the soul is immortal, it goes

hours. After confirming that the body will not

back and forth between two worlds eternally.

revive, people make funeral arrangements.

In this sense, the concept is similar to the

The soul that leaves the body, if free of

transmigration of the spirit in Buddhism,-

attachments, resentments, and unfulfilled

however, the Ainu have neither the notions

wishes, departs for the next world quickly. It

of paradise nor of hell as in Buddhism and

travels through a cave near its village to a

lack terms for such entities. In the Amu view,

large lake, then goes to the mountaintop near

the conditions in which each human lives are

the lake for its departure. Once this soul

a result of one's own efforts in life, not from
preordained fate, and this notion applies to
gods and things as well.
The starting point of the Ainu religion
is the fundamental idea that the difference
between life and death lies with the spirits
and that each spirit possesses a unique abil¬
ity or spiritual power. For generations, the
Ainu people have examined questions and
rectified problems by applying the theory
of spirits to their real lives (fig. 26.7), and
their religion encompasses philosophy,
science, law, medicine, sociology, and edu¬
cation. Specific examples of Ainu cultural
beliefs are contained in their legends, folk¬

26.7 Exorcising Illness

lore, and narratives.

An old method of curing disease, one

The Ainu people, who today live a

of the primary functions of the Ainu

modern life, still value spiritual aspects of

shaman, is seen in this photograph

their religion even if they have been con¬

by Sister M. Inez Hilger, who traveled

verted to various Japanese or Western

in the Ainu region in 1965-66. The
patient is bound with bulrush cord,

ideologies. Through special occasions such

and harvesting sickles and knives are

as funerals, memorial services, exorcisms,

being used to '‘cut’’ the power of the

festivals of gods, and oracles delivered via

evil spirits. (NAA: Inez Hilger 2-5)

shamans, the Ainu feel that their traditional
arrives in the next world, it goes to a paternal

ideas and customs are still alive in them

ancestors' village (if the soul is male) or

and that their identity lies in Ainu culture.

maternal ancestors' village (if female) and is

Although the world faces diverse environ¬

guided to the womb of a female half of a

mental problems today, the Ainu people are

certain couple who live in the village,- there it

inspired by the wisdom of their ancestors to

settles in an invisible small container. In the

create a happy relationship with nature,- now

container the soul begins to grow as an

they have begun relearning the tradition of

embryo that will eventually be born in the

mutual respect between humans and kamuy

next world. The newborn will slowly grow up

in the hope that they can contribute to the

absorbing the culture of the next world,

future of the world.

2 6 / KAMUY: AINU GODS

197

T

he Ainu are the indigenous

ous trees as silver fir (Picea jezoensis) and white fir

Hokkaido, and the southern part

(Abies sacbalinensis). Large land mammals include

of the Kurile Islands and are

The Ainu
Ecosystem
Hitoshi Watanabe

the northeastern part abounds in such conifer¬

population of southern Sakhalin,

brown bear (Ursus arctos) and deer (Cervus

regarded as a single ethnic group. They are

nippon). The ancestors of today's Ainu were

distinguished from Japanese and from other

hunter-gatherers who exploited their resources

indigenous peoples like the Okinawans by

by hunting, fishing, and collecting various wild

their distinct language and customs. This

plants. In Hokkaido, the monthly mean

essay describes the culture-ecosystem com¬

temperature between December and March is

plex of only one of these Ainu groups, the

below zero degrees centigrade, and the land is

Hokkaido Ainu.

usually covered with heavy snow during this

The Hokkaido Ainu were forced to alter

period. This natural environment affected life

their traditional hunting, fishing, and gather¬

cycles in the biological world and influenced

ing way of life by the Meiji government of

Ainu seasonal activities and lifeways.

Japan during the 1880s. For example, they

The Ainu had permanent dwellings as

The kotan, or village, was both the high¬

were forced to relocate to marginal land in

the base for family life, with several houses

est political structure and the economic

often vain attempts to make small-scale farm¬

forming a village (kotan,- figs. 27.1, 27.2). The

ing the means of earning their livelihood.

house usually had a thatched roof, and a small

27.1

Village Economy

basis for Ainu life. Hunting, fishing, and
gathering plant foods, supplemented by

Relocation, economic change, and lifestyle

attached porch, used to store fish traps, fish

dens, provided the basic resources for

changes had a disastrous effect on their social

spears, and other equipment, led to the living

life. (UMA, photo by B. Lyman)

structure. This essay will discuss the status of

room. In the living room was a hearth at the

small amounts of produce raised in gar¬

the Ainu during the period immediately pre¬

center,- at the end of the room was a small

ceding this social degradation, before village

window (kamuy-puyar), which is considered

relocation and the Japanese government's

sacred and dedicated to ceremonial use (fig.

land-allocation program caused a permanent

31.5). Occupants of the house generally

coastal bay or river. Nineteenth-century

rupture of the Ainu ecosystem. The descrip¬

formed a nuclear family.

Hokkaido Ainu houses were framed

tions here are based on information collected

light-log constructions covered with

from elderly Ainu informants between 1952

grass or reed thatch. A typical family

and 1959 (H. Watanabe 1973: 1-5).

27.2

Ainu Kotan

Ainu life was centered around the

kotan, which consisted of a small num¬
ber of family residences (chise) located
along a fishing stream or a protected

compound consisted of a residence, an
elevated shed for food, male and female
toilets, and sometimes a log crib used

Hokkaido is an island with a range of
mountains and hills extending from north to

Ainu life cannot be explained apart from
the supernatural environment. Kamuy—the
spirits believed to pervade all parts of the
world—provided an active link between the
Ainu and nature. Belief in kamuy was a basic

as a bear cage. (Fong Chow Collection,

south in the central area and rivers radiating in

principle that governed all elements of Ainu

photo by Felice Beato)

all directions. In most of these rivers there are

society, including production and consump¬

198

successive runs of two kinds of Pacific salmon,

tion, territoriality, kinship, social organization,

dog salmon (Oncorhyncbus keta) and cherry

and social sanctions. The house and family life

salmon (Oncorhyncbus masou). The island is well

in the kotan were an important focus for all

wooded,- the southwestern part is rich in

activities that maintained relationships

latifoliate trees (represented by beech), while

between the people and kamuy.

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H

WATANABE

27.4

Ainu Ecosystem

between the sacred window

This schematic diagram illustrates the

3

4

and the altar was used as the

hunting
hut |

iwor, or territory surrounding a village

ritual site for the bear

that constitutes its resource zone.
Hitoshi Watanabe's research on

ceremony. The upstream

typical Ainu settlements in river valleys

orientation came from a

revealed the importance of these

religious belief that the

resource zones for the subsistence

homeland of the bear kamuy

economy, (after H. Watanabe 1973)

is in the mountains, where
River and tributaries-

the source of the salmon

Hillsides along the river course-

fishing

deer hunting (early winter and spring);

River banksplant collecting;
cultivation of plants
River terraces-

bear hunting (occasional or subsidiary)
i

Riverhead mountain region-

rivers is also located.
Surrounding the house
were various structures (fig.

bear hunting (periodic and intensive);
collection of elm bark

27.2) and sites relating to

deer hunting (autumn);

consumption of food and the

plant collecting;

preparation of raw materials,

habitation

including a place to skin
animals, drying frames for

The directional orientation of the house

27.3

Changing Lands, Changing Media

Before the arrival of Japanese set¬
tlers, Ainu occupied both coastal and
interior regions of Hokkaido, as the
Sakhalin and Kurile Ainu did until they

meat and fish, a cage for bear cubs, a food-

was determined by the location of the sacred

storage shed, a storehouse, and disposal

window, which was placed in relation to the

areas. These structures and sites were also

main river of the kotan, namely upstream or

arranged along directional orientation lines

toward the source of a salmon river. Inside the

(FT Watanabe 1973: fig. 1). According to

house, allocation of space, such as areas for

Ainu belief, food and materials were gifts

living and placement of furniture, was made

from the kamuy which they brought on their

with reference to the location of the hearth

bodies. Therefore, all consumption activities

lost their lands to Japanese and

and the sacred window. The fire in the hearth

had to be accompanied by various kinds of

Russians. Paintings like this from

was where the fire goddess, Fuchi, resided.

kamuy rituals. Every sacred place was marked

Shimanojo Murakami’s Curious Sights

Because communication with all other kamuy

by inaw (sacred shaved sticks) set up as

was considered impossible without Fuchi's

offerings to the kamuy.

of Ezo Island (1799) reveal the
importance of coastal resources in
early Ainu history. Ainu-e rarely depict

mediation, all kamuy rituals began with a

Kamuy ceremonies were also held at the

ceremony at the hearth. The sacred window

hunting, fishing, and collecting sites. The

because Japanese artists did not

provided access to kamuy outside the house

house in the kotan was a ritual center con¬

often venture beyond the Japanese

and was an entrance and exit dedicated to the

necting the hunting and fishing sites through

bear kamuy, who visited the house during the

ceremonies led by the family patriarch (fig.

hear ceremony.

27.3). The headman of the local group

life in the interior of these islands

settlements on the coast. By the time
photographic documentation began
after the 1860s, most Ainu had been
forced from valuable coastal lands by

Outside the sacred window was an altar

presided over the important communal

Japanese settlement and were living

(nusa), which also faced upstream and was

rituals, especially those related to salmon

primarily in interior villages. (HML)

used for kamuy ceremonies. The space

fishing and hear hunting.
The kotan was generally situated along
a river with a dog-salmon run, below the
upper limit of the run, and was at the center
of various resource-distribution zones (FT
Watanabe 1964a: fig. 14). People exploited
hunting, fishing, and collecting sites sur¬
rounding the kotan and transported food and
other resources into the kotan (FT Watanabe
1973: figs. 7, 8). The usual configuration of a
kotan, illustrated in fig. 27.4, was centered on
a salmon river (Zone 1) near the habitual
fishing site of the people of the kotan and the
spawning grounds of dog salmon. This site
and a secondary site on a branch river for
fishing cherry salmon during its spawning
period defined the territory of a local group
Zone 2 included riverbanks where Ainu
collected edible plants—in spring, new

27/ AINU

ECOSYSTEM

199

ing plants and drying and storing
wild game brought in from the
hunting and fishing sites.
In December the salmon run
stopped, deer disappeared from
the fields around the kotan, bears
began to hibernate, and the land
became covered with snow until
March (fig. 27.6). During this part
of winter, the Ainu depended
primarily on presewed food. Dog
salmon was the winter staple, and so
the volume of its annual mn strongly
influenced Ainu existence. The
second most important subsistence
activity was deer hunting, but bear
hunting was more prestigious.
Women and children could
participate in salmon fishing and
deer hunting, but bear hunting was
the prerogative of men and was
27.5

River-Fishing Expedition

The great Japanese commercial photog¬
rapher Kusakabe Kimbei was one of the

leaves,- in summer, lily root (turep) (H.

conducted with great decorum.

Watanabe 1986: 247),- in autumn, nuts and

The spatial distribution of hunting,

berries. Zone 3 included terraced fields near

fishing, and collecting sites (zones I to 5) and

first to record the Ainu with a camera.

the edge of the kotan where they hunted deer,

the annual and daily cycles of subsistence

to Kimbei, illustrates the use of exotic

whose meat was preserved for winter consumption.

activities fit well to the spatial-temporal

subject matter and composition; such

Zone 4, mountainous areas on both sides of the

structure of the habitat. This adaptation

tinted images evoked a lyrical landscape

river, was rich in coniferous trees and, as the winter

depended on the periodicity of the biotic

range of deer, was the site of deer hunting in early

environment—the appearance and disappear¬

winter and early spring. Deer hunting also

ance of plants, animal movements, and

occurred in the fields in autumn (zone 3),- in early

hibernation—which characterized the

This nineteenth-century view, attributed

that appealed to foreign and Japanese
tourists in the early Meiji period. (LC)

spring the purpose of hunting was mainly to obtain

northern habitat. According to the traditional

the heavy fur the animals had grown for winter.

Ainu view of environment, however, the man-

Zone 5 was the source area of the salmon river in

nature relationship is not just a single physical

the mountains with shaip slopes above the limit of

system. In their view, animals and plants were

the dog-salmon ain. While there were few deer

not simply physical entities but had two

here, this zone had many bear and was the center

aspects that were thing and non-thing. They

of their hibernation area. This area was the focus of

believed that the periodicity of their habitat

bear hunting, which was conducted periodi¬

was not due to scientific principles but was a

cally according to precise plans, and here, in

phenomenon maintained and guaranteed by

early spring, bears born in January or February

their ceremonial activities. This belief is

were captured for the bear ceremony.

clearly expressed in Ainu animal rituals.

Staples and most other necessary resources

200

Various ceremonies articulate this view,

were procured in zones 1 to 3, which lay within

principally the rituals concerning large and

a one-day round-trip from the kotan. This prox¬

small species, best represented by those

imity enabled people to occupy the kotan

focused on bear and salmon. Although these

throughout the year. For hunting and fishing

two ceremonies have some variation, as do

trips far from the kotan, small structures were

lesser ceremonies, the underlying belief was

built, typically bear-hunting huts in zone 5 and

the same. According to the hayokpe (disguise)

winter deer-hunting cottages in zone 4,- salmon¬

theory, bears and salmon are the disguised

fishing cottages were built in some areas (FT

bearers of animal kamuy who visit the Ainu.

Watanabe 1973: map 2). Because hunting and

The Ainu reward them with gifts and

fishing required someone to stay in the seasonal

welcome them as honored guests because

huts for a period of time, it was generally con¬

they need the kamny's presents of fish, meat,

sidered men's work (fig. 27.5). Women and

and fur. The people send the kamuy home

children remained home, gathering and process¬

with inaw, sake, and other gifts, hoping that

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H

WATANABE

the animal kamuy will wish to visit again the

(H. Watanabe 1973: fig. 4).

Ainu who so respectfully welcomed them.

While the homeland of the salmon

The principle belief of the salmon ritual,

kamuy was identified as the sea, the bear

which is the same for bear rituals, is enunciated

kamuy reside in the sacred mountains at the

in three stages: (1) the first ceremony, held

headwaters of each hunter's salmon river

while waiting for salmon kamuy to appear,

(H. Watanabe 1973: 73; 1990). This place

includes predictions of when the run will begin;

was the seat of the chief bear kamuy for

(2) the first-salmon ceremony coincides with

the entire river basin, who was known as

the first run near the kotan and celebrates the

metorushi-kamuy and was the highest-ranked

salmon kamuy as the first visitor of the season,-

kamuy of the Ainu pantheon. The bear¬

(3) at the end of spawning, a ceremony is held

hunting system was managed more strictly

at the spawning grounds of the local group in

than other subsistence activities because

which a mandible bone that represents all

it concerned the kamuy. Only young men

salmon kamuy caught by the local group is sent

who were believed capable of administering

home to the spirit world. For a certain period—

the activity with no errors were selected to

at the appearance of silver salmon in the late

inherit the management procedures,- thus,

phase of the run—between stages two and

not all Ainu men were bear hunters.

three, the use of bag-nets, fishing implements

The bear ritual involved two types of

used mainly by women and children for night

ceremonies: the bear-sending ceremony for

fishing (the most active time of the spawning

animals killed in the forests and another
for bear cubs reared in the kotan. Only the
highest-qualified and most honored hunters,
who formed an elite stratum of Ainu society
(H. Watanabe 1983,- 1992), were permitted
to be participants in the iyomante bear cere¬
mony for this highest-ranked kamuy. Their
special status was clearly reflected in their
assigned roles and seats. These ceremonies
were conducted by the largest Ainu cor¬
porate kin groups (sbine itokpa), and all bear
hunters of each group participated (H.
Watanabe 1964b: fig. 2). These hunters
identified their traditional social relationship
with metorushi-kamuy of their river basin
through a patrilineal ancestral mark (itokpa)
common to their group, which was engraved
on inaw offered to the bear kamuy and on a
man's ikupasuy (prayer stick).
The Ainu ecosystem is not a simple
physical system. Its structure is based on

run) was taboo (H. Watanabe 1973: 29). Salmon

principles of social solidarity between man,

Hokkaido’s long coid winters, with

ceremonies are conducted by each local group,

biotic species, and kamuy; two subsystems—

heavy snowfalls, often made deer

and all male members of the group participate.

bear and salmon rituals—deal with physical

The ritual procedure of salmon fishing

aspects of the biotic world in both techno¬

27.6

Ice Fishing

and bear hunting difficult. At such
times, ice-hole fishing provided im¬

was synchronized with the biological cycle of

logical and spiritual aspects. Kamuy-nomi, the

Hirasawa illustrates in this nine¬

salmon, and that in turn was synchronized

belief that the gods had to be celebrated, is

teenth-century painting. In general,

with the exploitation process. The ritual cycle

the core of the ritual aspect. The function of

Ainu lands offered sufficient food,

of salmon fishing and the relationship among

this system was to sustain Ainu behavioral

and starvation was rare. (HMM)

these three phases served as both a stimulus

adaptation to the spatial-temporal structure

and pacemaker for the technological cycle

of the northern environment.

portant food resources, as Byozan

27/ AINU

ECOSYSTEM

201

Foods of
Choice
TOSHIHIRO KoHARA

INU BELIEVE THAT EVERYTHING

lessons about the importance of these foods

edible—including such mammals

and the consequences—famine—if they

as bears and deer, such fish as

are withheld.

salmon and trout, and such plants

Although certain aspects of Ainu culture

as the lily—are given to the human world by

such as the spirit-sending ceremonies (iyomante),

the gods (kamuy) that represent these species.

oral traditions, clothing, and material culture

Some of these kamuy, notably bears, are still

have been studied, the traditional Ainu diet,

worshipped by many Ainu in private and

which was the basis for daily life, has only

public ceremonies. Although Ainu no longer

recently become a matter of ethnological

explicitly worship the kamuy of salmon, trout,

investigation. As a result, today we know

or deer, they pray to the kamuy who control

about Ainu eating habits and foods dating

these animals to ensure that they will return

back only to the middle of the nineteenth

to the human world again as gifts of food

century, after which time the consumption of

from the gods. While the Ainu do not

traditional Ainu foods declined greatly due to

worship plants directly, they give thanks to

economic and lifestyle changes resulting from

the kamuy who ensure their regeneration and

assimilation policies implemented after the

who taught humans how to use them for food,

Meiji period began in 1868.

medicine, and other purposes. These beliefs

Contrary to the general impression

have been handed down in stories that teach

created by the image of the Ainu as hunters
who used poisoned arrows and traps, meat
was not the dominant element of the Ainu
diet but was used to supplement more impor¬
tant foods like seaweed, plants, and fish
(fig. 28.1). Wild plants gathered by women
from fields and hills were particularly impor¬
tant (fig. 28.4), and in the past their collec¬
tion and preservation consumed a large part

28.1

June: Gathering Seaweed

of daily Ainu life (fig. 28.2). As soon as the

In his series of sketches describing the
monthly cycle of the Ainu year, Byozan

snow began to melt in spring and the trees

Hirasawa painted this scene of Ainu

and grass began their cycle of new growth,

boats sailing off the coast of Hokkaido

the Ainu had to begin once again preparing

while Ainu gather seaweed, a dietary

for the coming winter. The annual task of

staple and an important export product

preserving food was, and continues to be,

to Honshu. The images in Hirasawa’s

crucial to supplying their nutritional needs

series, Ainu Manners and Customs,
painted after 1872, show the different

during a long winter and for avoiding unpre¬

activities that occupied the Ainu in

dictable famines that occurred when fish or

each season. (HMH)

game became scarce.
The best source of information about
plant foods and uses is the volume dedicated
to that subject in Mashiho Chiri's Classified
Dictionary of the Ainu Language (1953—62). In

most cases the Ainu name plants according to
their uses: if they are collected when their
flowers are in bloom, Ainu remember them
by their flowers, but if they did not eat the
blossoms or use them to identify the plants,
they often had no knowledge of them. Plants
that were of no use to the Ainu were fre¬
quently left unnamed, and sometimes similar
or identical words were given to different
plants. Rather than using systematic botanical
classification, the Ainu only categorized those
plants that were important to them,- this sys¬
tem varied from region to region, so identical
plants had different names or different plants
had the same name according to local usage.

202

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / T. KOHARA

28.4

Ainu Foods

In addition to salmon (right), tradi¬
tional Ainu foods included such
plants as wild anemone (Anemone

flaccida), wild garlic, cow parsnip, and
skunk cabbage, which were collected

However, most plants that were important in

their distinctive names often no longer exist

the Ainu diet are named identically through¬

and the regions cannot be recognized because

out Hokkaido. (Interestingly, names of ani¬

of the loss of traditional knowledge of local

mals and fish do not vary geographically as

flora as well as ecological changes.

often as do those of plants.)

Most preserved foods were made from

In some cases names of regions were

plants that were collected in spring and then

dried. Lily roots (left) were also boiled

based on the types of plants common to those

kept in storehouses next to the family's main

to extract starch used for dumplings

regions: for instance, areas with particularly

house. Because there was no possibility of

luxuriant growths of edible plants had names

preservation by refrigeration (except in some

and dried whole or were boiled and

(center) in soups and stews. (HACRC)

reflecting these characteristics. As a result of

north coastal villages where sea ice could

the agricultural and forestry development

be gathered and stored) and salt was a very

projects that began in the Meiji period,

expensive commodity that could only be

however, the plants that gave these regions

obtained by trade from the Japanese, most
foods were preserved by drying. Plants such as
wild garlic (cjyoja ninniku), cow parsnip (oohana
udo), skunk cabbage (bimezazen so), and a kind
of anemone (nirin so) were collected and dried
whole or were boiled and then dried. In
addition, the Ainu, rather than eating the
tender new growth or young shoots of a wild
plant, instead waited until the plant grew large
in order to harvest and preserve as much edible

28.2, 28.3

Stripping Grain

Various grains, including barnyard and
foxtail millet, were grown for food and
beverage in small garden plots; the
Ainu also grew wheat, vegetables,
greens, and root plants. This image
from the early-nineteenth-century
work Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood by
Shimanojo Murakami shows Ainu
women stripping grain from its sheath.
Grain-strippers (pipa) made from mus¬
sel shells were held in the palm of the
hand by a loop around the two middle
fingers. Although the Ainu gardened,
true agriculture was not practiced in
Hokkaido until new cold-resistant strains
of rice revolutionized Hokkaido’s agri¬
cultural potential, leading to the open¬
ing of Hokkaido to Japanese farmers
after the Meiji Restoration in 1868.
(BMA 12.181; HML)

28/ FOODS OF CHOICE

203

28.6

28.6-28.8

Cooking Utensils

material as possible. They also caught large

Even simple utensils like spatulas for

quantities of salmon and trout from early spring

stirring millet and serving platters were
often decorated with artful carving.

into the fall and preserved them by grilling,

(BMS C13461, C13462; BMA 12.353)

drying, or smoking,- deer and bear meat were
also dried or smoked.

28.5

Food derived from processing lily root

Fish Roe Masher

Mashers, called ciporninap, were used

(turep) was shaped into a disc with a hole

to make such traditional foods as

pierced through the center so that it could be

boiled potatoes and salmon roe. Mash¬

strung above the hearth, where it would be

ers were made from the katsura tree

kept all year long. The Ainu also picked the

because it imparted the least odor and

bulbs of nonflowering plants in June and July

taste. (BMA 12.588)

and extracted starch that was dried and
preserved in ways that varied from region to
region in Hokkaido. Sometimes this starch
was made into dumplings that enriched soup
or rice gruel. Disc-shaped dumplings made
with the hardened fibers that remained after
the starch was removed could be saved for
years,- these were broken into pieces and
soaked to extract starch and flavor. Such foods
continue to have an important role in Ainu
ceremonial life.
Historical evidence has shown that
28.7

limited farming was practiced by the Ainu in
the southern parts of Hokkaido during the
Edo period (1615-1 868). People cultivated
and ate barnyard millet, foxtail millet, barley,
wheat, adzuki beans, hemp, peas, soybeans,
vetch, rattlebox (Crotolaria), daikon, leek or
onion, cucumber, tomato, potatoes, and two
types of American squash (Hayashi 1975), but
these foods were always supplements and did
not become staples until farming became fully
established in the late nineteenth and early

28.5
204

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / T. KOHARA

28.9

28.9

Serving Ladles

Ainu ladles were made in many differ¬
ent forms. Soup ladles like these were
called rurkasup; large ladles used to
stir rice mash when making sake were
called sakaekasup. The lower spoon
was collected in Piratori, Hokkaido, by
Romyn Hitchcock in 1888. (MPM
N17027; NMNH 150,670)

twentieth centuries. Rice was generally not

plants, vegetables, and legumes and, in

grown locally but was obtained, along with

winter, with dried plants. In addition to

other grains, through trade with the Japanese,

drying salmon for future use, salmon was

and became an essential ingredient for making

sometimes eaten raw with green onion, but

sake and dumplings for use in ceremonies

most fish was generally cooked. Other types

(fig. 28.1 3). The introduction of rice is marked

of flavors were obtained by using sardine oil,

by the appearance of mortars and pestles

Pacific herring, and Pacific cod,- fat from

among the Ainu of southern Hokkaido,- these

seals, sea lions, whales, and dolphins, and

tools were used to create various ground-

small amounts of salt. The Ainu also flavored

rice products.

some foods with the sap of sugar-maple trees,

Recent archaeological evidence suggests

which sweetened the food as it simmered.

that during the prehistoric Satsumon era,

Most Ainu food, however, would be rather

people made greater use of plant products

bland to modern tastes.

than has previously been believed (Crawford

In Hokkaido and the Kuriles, the Ainu

and Yoshizaki 1987). In addition to local plant

crafted bowls, platters, spoons, and cups of

products—barnyard and foxtail millet—seeds

wood and birch bark (figs. 28.5-28.12),-

of barley, wheat, adzuki and inung beans, hemp,

larger bowls were obtained by trade with

beefsteak plant (shiso), rice, and melon have

Japan. The Sakhalin Ainu, however, created

been found in numerous sites in southwestern

large, beautifully sculpted serving bowls.

Hokkaido dating as early as A.D. 900. These

Wooden utensils were frequently decorated

data suggest that in addition to making use of

with delicate sculptural and engraved designs

a wide variety of natural resources of their land,

in floral and geometric motifs. Because the

the early Ainu adopted plants from Japan and

Ainu diet often included soups and gruels,

the Asian continent for use in local gardening.
The Ainu utilized this variety of food
resources to create a tasty and varied table

their utensils included spoons and small
spatulas. Chopsticks were also used.
This brief description has addressed

fare. It was common to have two meals a day,

traditional Ainu foods primarily in the

one in the morning and one in the evening.

central and southern region of Hokkaido,-

The typical daily menu consisted of various

coastal Ainu had a diet that was rich in

soups and, after an active rice trade was

marine products and varied from region to

established with Japan, rice gruel flavored

region. Ainu everywhere utilized the many

with seasonal wild vegetables and fish. Fish

wild plant foods available to them, in the

and meat—always eaten cooked, not raw—

southern regions, they also practiced garden

were also flavored with freshly picked wild

agriculture. With Japanization, the introduc-

28/ FOODS OF CHOICE

205

28.11

28.10

Kurile Spoons

Museum records indicate that these
two spoons were collected from the
Kurile Ainu in the early twentieth century.
They resemble festival spoons used by
the Nivhki of northern Sakhalin, but such
spoons are found occasionally in Kurile
and Hokkaido collections, possibly indi¬
cating trade or marriage exchange with
28.13

Sakhalin. (BMS C13474, C13475)

206

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / T. KOHARA

28.14 Brewing Rice Wine
Brewing alcoholic beverages from millet
and imported rice was an old tradition.
The large lacquerware vessels used for
this purpose are illustrated in the pic¬
ture scroll Ainu Manners and Customs,
painted by Hokuyo Nishikawa in the
late nineteenth century. (HML)

’'///'//WS'&k

.

■ ■"/////////,/,

28.15 Storehouse
This Ainu-e from illustrations of Ezo

Livelihood, painted by Shimanojo
Murakami in the early nineteenth cen¬
tury, shows women working at the el¬
evated storehouses used to keep food
dry and away from animals. (HML)

28.11, 28.12, 28.13
Bowls and Platter
Ainu serving bowls and platters varied
regionally but were often made with
great care. The bowl with the handle
(fig. 28.13), collected before 1879,
suggests a Sakhalin origin, perhaps
traded from the Nivkhi; the bowl at
top, collected in Hokkaido before
1888, lacks this feature and has
crested ends. Both have elegant
sculptural form and a deep patina
from decades of use. The decorated
platter must also have been well
used by an Ainu family. Carved plat¬

tion of new foods engineered for the northern

ters became a staple of the Ainu tour¬

climate and the tight regulation of fish and

though most of these are no longer basic

game resources have brought many changes

subsistence foods, they are still caught and

to the traditional Ainu diet. Even so, Ainu

hunted and are used in ceremonies to thank

continue to use natural foods obtained from

the gods for the bounty of nature.

ist trade by the mid-nineteenth cen¬
tury, but old, used examples like this
one show they had deep traditional
roots. (PMC 22431, 7046; MPM

the mountains, rivers, and coasts. Even

N17296)

28/FOODS OF CHOICE

207

But this picture was as far from reality as

OR MORE THAN A HUNDRED YEARS

Technology,
Settlement,
and Hunting
Ritual

the Ainu had the not very flattering

it could be, for closer scrutiny reveals that

reputation of being one of the most

traditional Ainu culture was characterized by

primitive peoples in the world.

complexity in social and economical terms, a

Although depicted as friendly and good-

of the coastal Indians of northwestern North

at the lowest rung of the evolutionary ladder

America. Living in a habitat that offered

that nineteenth-century anthropologists were

varied and sometimes abundant resources,

so keen to construct. The English traveler

the Ainu found many ingenious ways to use

A. Henry Savage Landor gave a good example

these resources within the confines of a

of this view:

largely hunting, fishing, and gathering way

As a hog delights in filth, so the Ainu can

Hans Dieter Olschleger

complexity that might be compared to that

hearted, they were seen nevertheless as being

of life (fig. 29.1).

only live in dirt, neglect, and savagery of
personal habits. They are made that way,
and they cannot help it. They are excluded
from progress by an impassable barrier....
All in all, the Ainu are the furthest behind

The Ainu Habitat
The Ainu habitat was a region of transition
between the subarctic and the temperate zones

in the great race of human development

stretching over more than nine degrees of lati¬

(Landor 1893: 216, 228).

tude, between the forty-second and the fiftyfirst parallels. The resulting differences in tem¬
perature and precipitation were increased fur¬
ther by the influence of ocean currents: the
warm Tsushima Current along the west coast of
Honshu and Hokkaido and the cold Chishima
Current (also called Oyashio) touching the
Kurile Islands and the east coast of Hokkaido.
A second cold current, the East Sakhalin
Current, flows southward from eastern Sakhalin
and influences the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk
in northeastern Hokkaido. These varied influ¬
ences gave rise to different ecological zones,
each characterized by a unique composition of
flora and fauna,- they also exercised a profound
influence on Ainu culture, resulting in regional
differences in social and economic behavior
that are often overlooked when describing
traditional Ainu culture and society. Precisely
speaking, there was not one single type of
Ainu culture but rather many regional varieties
(Olschleger 1989).

Ainu Subsistence
The Ainu were hunters, fishermen, and
gatherers who exploited a variety of natural
resources (fig. 29.2). The relative value of
each of these resources for nutrition, clothing,
ritual, and other purposes varied according
29.1

Family of Hunters

to the aforementioned ecological regions. In

Hokkaido Ainu hunted in the mountains

addition, since 1710 small-scale horticulture

from late autumn to early summer. This

was practiced in some parts of southwestern

painting shows three men and a dog

Hokkaido (see below).

setting out on a hunting expedition.
Dogs were not only used for tracking

Today the Ainu are often depicted as

and driving game but for companion¬

hunters of bears. It is true that the brown bear

ship and protection. This nineteenth-

(Ursus arctos) played a prominent part in

century Ainu-e by Koretsu Matsumae

mythology and ritual, but as a part of Ainu

was purchased by Edward S. Morse; it
was accessioned by the Peabody Essex

diet its meat was negligible. Far more impor¬

Museum in 1920. (PEM E17874)

tant nutritionally were other land mammals

208

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/ H.

D

OLSCHLEGER

such as the Sika deer (Cennts nippon, yuh in
Ainu) in Hokkaido, and muskdeer and rein¬
deer on the island of Sakhalin.
Sika deer roamed the plains and moun¬
tains of Hokkaido in enormous numbers until
they were drastically reduced by Japanese
hunters during the last quarter of the nine¬
teenth century. The Sika migrated from their
winter terrain in hills along the rivers to
spend their summer on the plains, and Ainu
men hunted them during the spring and
the fall seasons with different methods.
During the fall migration the hunters erected
wooden fences in lengths varying between
several hundred and several thousand feet
near the villages. Spring bows with poisoned
arrows were placed in openings left in this
fence and checked at intervals. The string of
the bow was held by a trigger fastened to a
cord so that when a deer tripped the cord,
the trigger was released and the arrow struck
the animal. The paths of the migrating deer
were also barred with wooden spears whose
tips were hardened by fire and whose shafts
were set into the ground.
Whenever possible, Sika were also
hunted with hand bows and poisoned
arrows. This method was of special impor¬
tance during the mating season when hidden
hunters lured the male deer with the sound
of a deer whistle that imitated the call of the
doe (fig. 29.3). Bows and arrows were also
used in the hilly regions where the Sika
spent the winter (fig. 29.4).
During the spring hunt the hunters
took advantage of the snow still covering
wide areas. They drove the deer—often with
the help of their dogs—into snow patches
and killed them while they floundered (fig.
29.2

29.5),- sometimes deer were also caught with

Hunter in Mountain Clothes

Ainu hunters spent many days away

a lasso and killed with clubs.

from their villages while hunting in the

On Sakhalin Island, the Sika deer was

mountains. For these expeditions

unknown, but reindeer (Rancjifer tarandus, called

they were equipped with little more
than a quiver, a bow, a hunting knife,

tunakay by the Ainu) and muskdeer (Moschus

a smoking kit, a fire kit, snowshoes,

moscbiferus, called opokay) were both hunted

and a heavy fur robe that doubled as

during the winter with spring bows erected

sleeping gear. A staff was used to

along game paths and with hand bows and

clear underbrush, vault streams, and

lances,• muskdeer were also caught in snares.

give protection against bears or
wolves. (NPS/LNHS)

The extreme maritime ecology of the Kurile

29.3 Deer Call

importance in Ainu subsistence there.

Islands meant that land mammals had little
During the fall mating season hunters

As already mentioned, the brown bear

lured male deer with a whistle (ipakkeni

was far more important ritually than for

or irektep), whose sound approximated

nutrition. The bear was hunted during the

the call of a doe; these were made
from the bladder of a frog or salmon.

spring and fall by groups of younger and

(BMA 12.583A)

more active men (fig. 29.8). After the leaves

29/ SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

209

with their poisoned lances wedged against a
rock. When the bear reached the spear tip the
hunter would jump aside, leaving his lance
in place, and the bear would impale himself.
The same method was used during the spring
hunt when hunters hoped to catch newborn
cubs to take back to the village to rear for the
iyomante ceremony.
In addition to these land mammals, the
Ainu hunted foxes {Vulpes vulpes,- Hokkaido
Ainu chironnup, Kurile Ainu cawcaw), otters
(Lutra lutra, Ainu esaman), hares (Lepus timidus,
Kurile Ainu isepo, Sakhalin Ainu osukep), and
other species with spring bows (figs. 29.6,
29.7), snares, and special box traps with
sliding doors activated by bows and trip lines.
As important as Sika, muskdeer, and rein¬
deer were economically, different species of
anadromous fish, which spend part of their
29.5

29.4, 29.5

lives in the open sea and return to the rivers for
Deer Hunting

Hokkaido Ainu hunted deer in winter
with bows and arrows as illustrated in

fell, temporary huts were erected in the

spawning, were even more crucial for Ainu sur¬

vicinity of the bears' wintering territory in

vival. The longer rivers of Hokkaido provided

hilly country,- using these huts as base camps,

optimal spawning grounds for cherry salmon

this scene from Hokuyo Nishikawa's

hunters roamed the region placing spring

(Oncorbyncbus mason, Ainu ichaniw, ikreppo, sakipe)

restricted the movements of deer and

bows with poison arrows along the game

and dog salmon (Oncorbyncbus keta, Ainu cbep) as

made them more vulnerable to snow-

paths or pursuing their prey with hand bows

well as some other species of salmon

shoe-clad hunters. Bows (ku), about one

and poisoned arrows. After the bears with¬

(Oncorbyncbusgorbuscha, Ainu bmoy-, Oncorhyn-

drew into their dens to hibernate, the hunters

cbus nerka, Ainu kapatcbep). In addition, other

Ainu Manners and Customs. Deep snow

meter long, were made of yew or linden
and had bowstrings made of twisted

began searching for them and flushed them

anadromous fish such as trout (especially Houcbo

like the upper one illustrated, were

out by prodding them with long poles and

pertyii, Ainu cbiray, but also Salvelinus malma) and

wisteria vine soaked in fish oil. Some,

strengthened by cherry-bark wrappings.

throwing rocks. When the bear emerged, it

a species of carp (’Tribolodon baknensis, Ainu supun)

Arrows had feather fletching and points

was shot with poisoned arrows. If it was not

could sometimes be caught in quantities.

of bone, wood, or iron. (MPM N17025;

killed immediately, the furious bear often

NMNH 150642, 150638; HML)

charged the men, who stood their ground

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H.

D.

The fishing season on Hokkaido started
in spring and lasted until the beginning of

OLSCHLEGER

winter. The first fish to ascend the rivers were

Pacific coasts of Hokkaido (especially

trout and carp, which were caught in small

Shiretoko Peninsula), Sakhalin, and the Kuriles,

quantities. With the appearance of cherry

while the sea otter was found only in the area

salmon in July the most productive fishing

surrounding the Kuriles.

activities began In September the dog-

Harpoons were the most important

salmon run began, adding another staple to

implements for hunting seals and sea lions

the Hokkaido Ainu diet.

and were made in one-pronged and two¬

Different species of fish were caught

pronged versions (fig. 29.13) in Hokkaido.

using different methods. Dogs were trained to

The tip of the harpoon was detachable and

jump into the water and catch salmon, a

was fastened to a long line held by the hunter

fishing method reported in Hokkaido as well

(fig. 29.12). The Ainu of northwestern

as Sakhalin. Pish were also caught by rod and

Sakhalin hunted in spring when the seals

line using a single hook or by lines with

gave birth on the drifting ice. Small groups of

multiple hooks that were left in the water and

young men left their villages before dawn in

periodically checked. To exploit the migra¬

boats to search for the seals and pups, and

tions of salmon the Ainu constructed brush

their hunt might take them far from land

fences across the rivers with openings left at

(Ohnuki-Tierney 1974: 26).

intervals for fish traps. Different kinds of nets

The relative importance of all these

were also used: a trawl net was slowly dragged

resources varied by region. The nineteenth-

downstream to catch salmon moving in the

and twentieth-century Ainu of Hokkaido

opposite direction,- a small stream would be

were primarily inland hunters, gatherers, and

barred across its course by a net,- or fish would

fishermen, and only a minority subsisted on

be driven into a bag-shaped net.

maritime resources. Sika deer and two species

The most important fishing device was

of salmon were the dietary staples for humans

the marek, a long spear with a pivoting iron

as well as for dogs, which were used only

hook at its end (fig. 29.1 1). These spears were

for hunting. Even in Hokkaido, the relative

used from a boat, from the bank of the river, or

proportion of these resources varied accord¬

from a "peep-fishing" hut (worun cbise), a simple

ing to region: the farther upstream, the more

shelter constructed on piles over the open

important were Sika deer due to the greater

water or, in winter, on the ice. During the later

concentration of salmon on the lower reaches

part of the fishing season (November and

of the rivers. Brown bear and other mammals,

December), the unuek was used in combination

birds, and fish species were of secondary

with a torch (fig. 29.10) that attracted salmon

importance for subsistence, and only in a few

by its light (H. Watanabe 1973: 19).
Salmon was caught in every part of the
Ainu region, but they were of special impor¬

parts of Hokkaido were sea mammals hunted,
such as the whale in Volcano Bay.
The Ainu of Sakhalin relied on salmon

tance in Hokkaido where the rivers were

and herring as food for both people and

longer than those in Sakhalin or in the Kurile

dogs during the cold season. Dogs were

Islands. In Sakhalin the most important species

more numerous in Sakhalin where they were

of fish was Pacific herring (Clupea pallasii, Ainu

used both for hunting and as sledge dogs

beroki). From March to May these fish gathered

(fig. 29.15). Where Sika deer was absent,

in large shoals along the western coastline to

reindeer and nuiskdeer took its place,- brown

spawn, and enormous quantities could be

bear, fur-bearing mammals, and birds were

caught by the Ainu with simple hand-nets.

also hunted. The smaller islands of the

Sea mammals were important only for

Kurile chain, with their relatively short

those Ainu living in close vicinity to the open

rivers, relied most heavily on the maritime

sea, for instance, Uchiura (Volcano) Bay and

resources. The Kurile Ainu hunted seals, sea

parts of eastern Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and the

lions, and sea otter,- seabirds and their eggs

Kuriles. One species, the ring seal (Pboca

were an important part of their diet, and

vitulina), is restricted to the Nemuro Peninsula of

salmon, which was available only in small

southeastern Hokkaido and the Kurile Islands,

numbers, was supplemented by ocean fish.

while another (Pboca larcjba) can be encountered
all over the region. Steller sea lions (Eumetopias

Hunting with Poison

jubata), which live in groups of several hundred

Poisoned arrows (suruku) were used in Hok¬

or even several thousand individuals during the

kaido for hunting Sika deer as well as brown

breeding season, used to be numerous along the

bear. The exact procedures for producing the

29/SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

24 4

29.7

29.8

amount was applied to the tongue or placed

29.7 Spring Bow Trap

poison differed and were generally kept se¬

Hunters increased their efficiency by

cret, but one of the main ingredients was the

between two fingers or on the thigh The

monkshood plant (fig. 29.17). The young

stronger the resulting numb feeling, the better

tubers of Aconitum spp. were collected in sum¬

the poison (Inukai and Natori 1969: 322).

using game traps like those depicted in
Rinzo Mamiya’s Illustrations of Northern
Ezo (1855); this image shows an otter

Poison was applied to the tips of arrows

approaching a spring bow armed with a

mer and dried in the shade until fall. It was

poison arrow. (HML)

believed that the most potent poison could be

used with hand hows as well as spring bows. A

extracted from those tubers that had softened

bear hit by one of these arrows could walk only

during drying. After being peeled the tubers

two hundred to three hundred yards (150 to 250

were ground up and the resulting pulp could

meters) or so before dying. Because the alkaloid

in this nineteenth-century painting by

be used with no further processing (Scheube

aconitum agent was only deadly upon entering

Byozan Hirasawa. Trap bows (akpe)

1882: 228). Sometimes the ground monks¬

the bloodstream, it was safe to eat the meat of

were often hastily contructed with

hood tubers were mixed with deer fat and

animals so killed as long as one removed the

29.6, 29.8 Bear Hunting
Larger varieties of traps and deadfalls
were used for deer and bear, as seen

materials found at the site. (NMNH
E150764; HMM)

buried for a few days (Siebold 1881: 20).

meat around the point of penetration. If a human

Additional ingredients occasionally included

were hit by a poisoned arrow there was only one

tobacco, poisonous spiders, or other plants.

remedy to save his life: cut out the affected spot

To test the potency of the fresh poison, a small

at once and wash the wound out.

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H.

D.

OLSCHLECER

29.11

29.9, 29.10, 29.11

Salmon Fishing

Until their numbers were reduced by
Japanese commercial fishing, large
numbers of salmon ran up streams
and rivers in Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and
the Kuriles, where they were caught
at night by fishermen carrying
birchbark torches (sune: fig. 29.10).
Fishing spears (marek, fig. 29.11)
equipped with pivoting hooks were

The Ainu of the Oshamanbe region of

away,- in winter, these cakes were an ingredi¬

vented from escaping when the hook

Hokkaido used the dried spines of a stingray

ent of a nutritious soup. To prepare the col¬

rotated forward. Such scenes attracted

to produce an arrow poison that was almost as

lected items for winter storage, a variety of

potent as that made from Aconitum; the spines

methods was employed. Bulbs were dried

emblematic of September in Ainu Man¬

were ground and applied to the arrow tip

and ground and berries and plants were dried

ners and Customs (after 1872). (UPM

together with the plant poison. Sometimes

and, especially in Sakhalin and the Kurile

A457A; BMA 12.597; HMH)

the spines themselves, fastened to poles or

Islands, preserved in herring, salmon, or sea-

used to impale the fish, which was pre¬

Japanese artists like Byozan Hirasawa,
who painted this image (fig. 29.9) as

29.9

arrows, were used as weapons (Inukai and

mammal oil. When fall came, the Ainu

Natori 1969: 323). Arrow poison was un¬

women collected nuts and berries. After

known in Sakhalin, but Ryuzo Torii (1919:

being cooked, chestnuts were pounded and

224) described its use in the Kurile Islands

the resulting paste was mixed with fish roe.

(Kurile Ainu souroukou).

Most of the plants that were used as raw
materials for producing household items—

Collecting

for instance, the inner bark of the elm trees

Ainu culture was characterized by a strict

used to make cloth (cittush)—were also gath¬

division of labor based on gender. Hunting

ered during the fall season.

and fishing were male tasks with only minor

On Sakhalin Island, gathering plants,

exceptions, while gathering was largely the

roots, berries, and nuts was far more impor¬

task of women, children, and elders. The

tant than on Hokkaido. Families without an

products of collecting activities were of

adult male hunter drew an important part

secondary importance for subsistence, but

of their subsistence from these sources, and

they nevertheless provided important

even under normal circumstances when

nutritional needs and raw materials for a

hunting did take place, collected foods con¬

variety of objects in daily or ritual use.

stituted a significant share of the diet in the

Beginning in spring the Hokkaido Ainu

cold season (Ohnuki-Tierney 1976a: 304).

collected edible plants and roots to serve as

In addition to numerous species of plants,

food for humans and for the bear cubs that

the Kurile Ainu collected the eggs of sea¬

had been caught during the bear-hunting

birds that breed in large colonies on most of

season at the end of winter, and a portion was

the islands (Torii 1919: 19).

stored for consumption during the cold sea¬
son. During the summer the bulbs of

Ainu Horticulture

Cardiocrimim Glebni (Ainu turep) were gathered,

The Ainu of Hokkaido practiced a simple

dried, and ground. The starchy powder was

form of horticulture that was first described

formed into cakes that were dried and stored

in 1710 but might be older (Takakura 1957:

29/SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

2f3

29.12, 29.13

Toggling Harpoons

Toggling harpoons have been used for
sea-mammal hunting by North Pacific
peoples for at least 6,000 years. Ainu
29.13

in Hokkaido used double-pronged har¬
poons (kite) to land such diverse prey
as swordfish, turtles, and sunfish. Unlike
simple harpoons that held their prey
with barbs, toggling harpoons turned
crossways under the prey’s skin or blub¬
ber, anchoring the implement so that it
could be retrieved by the harpoon line.
(NMNH E150675; AMNH 70-71B)

29.12

29.14

Sea-hunting Expedition

13, 15). Recent archaeological research at

island. As Japanese influence gradually spread

sites in southern Hokkaido has recovered

out to embrace the whole island, horticulture

remains of a variety of seeds, grains, and

followed suit. As a rule it can be said that the

legumes at ninth-century Satsumon sites, and

more the Japanese presence made itself felt, the

these finds have been corroborated at other

more important cultivation became to the Ainu

locations, suggesting that early Ainu may

economy. Only in a few places on the coasts of

have had a stronger agricultural base than is

the Sea of Okhotsk and deep in the Hokkaido

generally believed (Crawford and Yoshizaki

interior along minor rivers did the Ainu rely

1987). Recent Ainu horticulture probably

solely on hunting, fishing, and gathering.

stems from these early roots but in any case is

The main crops grown were turnips

Competition with the Japanese and

closely linked to Japanese agriculture systems

(Bmssica napobrassica, Ainu atane) and two types

Russians caused the Ainu to lose their

and products. In 1715 the northern frontier of

of millet (broomcorn, Panicum miliaceum, and

sea-hunting territories, but their former

cultivation stretched between Shiraoi in the

foxtail, Setaria italica), but the Ainu also culti¬

east and Shakotan Peninsula in the west, in

vated wheat and barley (Ainu muncji for all

Murakami’s Curious Sights of Ezo Is¬

close proximity to the center of Japanese

cereals), beans, peas, and potatoes. In the

land (1799). (HML)

settlement in the southwestern parts of the

beginning these were of subordinate impor¬

adaptation has been preserved in illus¬
trations such as this from Shimanojo

tance for subsistence, but as the Ainu were
increasingly forced to work for the Japa¬
nese—often spending several months in
summer at the coastal fishing stations—
the products of horticulture gained impor¬
tance as winter supplies. It is also reasonable
to assume that game was rapidly depleted
by overhunting near Japanese settlements.
The choice of a site for cultivation of
a garden was made for practical reasons.
Only if necessary did the Ainu resort to slashand-burn cultivation,- otherwise, the under¬
brush and trees were cleared and the terrain
was leveled with a hoe. After seeds were sown
the garden was left to itself, except for an
occasional weeding. Harvest began in the
second half of September, using a knife made
from the shell of a Sweetwater mussel (fig.
28.2). After three years the fertility of a gar214

TRAD1TIONAL CULTURE / H

D

OLSCHLEGER

29.15

Dogsled Travel

Dogsleds were used by many North
Pacific peoples, including the Ainu. Ainu
sleds are similar to those of Siberian
peoples, who may have introduced this
technology. This illustration comes from

den plot declined and a new site was found,

tips of arrows and lances, which were

but if slash-and-burn techniques were used a

obtained in trade. The principal hunting

garden could be kept for at least five years.

device was the bow and arrow (fig. 29.20).

After a fallow period of five or more years, an

The simple hand bow was preferably made

old garden plot could be cultivated once again.

of yew (Tnxus cuspidata, Ainu rannani), and the
string was made of plant fibers. Cherry bark

Rinzo Mamiya’s Illustrations of North¬

ern Ezo, dated 1855. (HML)

29.16

Sealskin Mitts

Seal products were important in the
economy of northern peoples. Seamammal meat was nutritious; its

Technology

was often wound around the full length of

The products of the exploitative activities

the bow. Arrows were quite short and

described above not only provided food but

consisted of a detachable point of bamboo or

were also used as raw materials to make nec¬

iron, a foreshaft usually of bone, and a shaft

essary goods. Of course, regional differences

of bamboo or reed. The spring bow was of

in the availability of plants and animals led

simpler design and was often carved on the

to a corresponding variability of materials used

spot where a trap was set. The lances used

for the same purpose. Ainu technology was

for self-defense in bear hunting had a long

also greatly influenced by contacts with other

shaft and — in earlier forms—a tip made of

used for tools and art; and its hide

cultures. The Ainu had several sources for

the leg bone of a Sika deer. After metal

made strong ropes, boat covers, and

obtaining metal, which became indispensable

became available, metal tips were used.

clothing. Sealskin boots and mitts were

in daily life, by trading with Japanese or

blubber fueled lamps; its ivory was

prized for being durable and water¬
proof. These Kurile mitts (called tekkas
in Hokkaido and matumere in Sakhalin)
made good work gloves but were not
very warm. (PMC 51605)

Different types of knives were used for

Chinese via the Amur River, and later with

hunting or as multipurpose tools. The

Russians in Sakhalin and the Kurile Islands.

common Ainu knife (makiri) was worn by

All hunting weapons were made from

men and women (fig. 29.19). The much

locally available wood except for the metal

bigger hunting knife (tashiro) resembled a
short sword (fig. 29.21) and was used in all
activities connected with hunting and
fishing. In both types of knives, the metal
blade was obtained by trade,- the richly
ornamented handle and sheath were carved
(by Ainu men using a carving knife with a
curved blade.
Since the introduction of weaving
techniques, clothing was produced from plant
fibers rather than from fur or hides. On
Hokkaido, a coarse tan cloth (attusb) was
woven from the inner bark of Japanese elm
(Ulmus laciniata) or from linden-tree bark (see
Kodama, this volume). Elm bark (at) was also
used in southern Sakhalin, but in addition a
white cloth (retarpe) was made from dried and
bleached nettle plant (Urtica takedana Ohwi).
The simple loom (fig. 45.5) used by Ainu

215

29.17

women consisted of a curved band of wood

Ainu Settlement Patterns

that fitted around the weaver's lower back, a

The Ainu of Hokkaido were overwhelmingly

rod upon which the cloth was wound, a shuttle,

inland hunters and fishermen. Their settle¬

a flat weaver’s "knife" of wood, a reed, and a

ments (kotan) of up to a dozen huts were

heddle to spread the warps. A miniature

erected near salmon-fishing grounds and in

version of this loom was used to weave narrow

close vicinity to hunting grounds in hilly or

belts and straps (Munro 1994: 23). The Kurile

mountainous regions. Because the spawning

Ainu did not have woven cloth except what

grounds that provided the best opportunity

they imported from Hokkaido,- instead, they

for fishing were usually located near the

relied on furs and bird skins for clothing. A

mouth of a tributary, Hokkaido Ainu kotan

watertight garment tailored from dried seal

could normally be found on the river terrace

intestines—identical to clothing produced in

near such a place.

the Aleutians and southwest Alaska—was

The majority of settlements were small,

especially useful for the damp and rainy climate

comprising only five huts (holding about

of the Kurile Islands.

twenty-five individuals) on average,- only in

Mats, used for floor and wall coverings

the Hidaka-Tokachi region in southern

and many other purposes, were woven on an

Hokkaido were settlements with up to thirty

improvised loom that consisted of a rod sup¬

houses occasionally encountered. Within

ported horizontally by two forked poles of the

villages, houses might be spaced between one

29.17, 29.18

appropriate height, intricate contrasting pat¬

and five hundred yards apart (about one to

Preparation of Poison for Hunting

terns were created by incorporating dyed reeds

five hundred meters), and villages were

Extract from the monkshood plant (Ac-

in the weave. Woven baskets (saranip), which

commonly two to five miles (four and eight

were used during the gathering excursions of

kilometers) apart, depending on local food

the women and also for storage, were plaited

availability. These settlements were inhabited

29.18) were used for grinding dried

from the inner bark of linden trees (see Tsuda,

all year round, at least by the women, the

roots and leaves and mixing the extract

Graburn and Lee, this volume). Pottery disap¬

children, and the elderly. The men made

with deer fat or some other binder to

peared from use among the Ainu in the four¬

several hunting excursions during each yearly

teenth century when iron pots began to be

cycle into the hilly regions bordering the

available from the Japanese, but Ainu men

rivers or to the headwaters,- there they slept in

onitum spp.) was used widely as a
hunting poison in northeastern Asia
and Alaska. Bowls of this type (fig.

produce an alkaloid poison that attacks
the nervous system. The poison was
applied to bamboo arrowpoints. When
this substance entered the blood¬

made and used a wide variety of bark and wood

temporary huts. The location of a kotan was

stream, death was nearly instanta¬

vessels and containers using special curved-

only changed when important resources were

neous. (Shin Mouri Collection; NMNH

blade knives. Many of the plates, bowls, ladles,

no longer available, as when, for example, the

Botany Library)

spatulas, and loom parts were decorated with

salmon run failed.
Compared to the inhabitants of Hok¬

elaborate Ainu-style carvings and became
family treasures and heirlooms.
2 16

kaido, the Sakhalin Ainu exhibited a stronger

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H. D. OLSCHLEGER

29.20

29.19 Maxim

Although data on the migration

A man's most trusted companion in

patterns of the Kurile Ainu are scarce, it is

the woods, even more than his dog,

known that they had even greater settlement

was his makiri or sheath knife, which
was worn hanging from the belt with a

mobility than either Hokkaido or Sakhalin

thong. This example, collected in

Ainu. Not all of the islands of the Kurile

1888 by Romyn Hitchcock in Piratori,

string were permanently inhabited, and

shows the artistry men used in deco¬
rating their prized possessions.
(NMNH E150729)

permanent settlements were found only on
degree of nomadism, moving to different

Shumshu, Paramoshir, Onekotan (possibly),

settlements seasonally. They primarily lived in

Shiashkotan, Rasshua, and Urup in the
central Kuriles, and Iturup and Kunashiri in

29.20 Quiver with Hunting Bag

the coastal regions, with only a few people

and Arrows

living permanently in the interior of the island.

the southern Kuriles. All other islands were

Ainu hunters kept their arrows in quiv¬

Their summer settlements were built in direct

only temporarily visited during the summer

proximity to the beach, while the winter

to hunt for sea mammals and birds.

ers that were strengthened by cherrybark wrappings, which also imparted
a beautiful gleaming surface. Bone or

houses were erected in the upper reaches of

Like the Sakhalin Ainu, the Kurile Ainu

ivory attachments helped stiffen the

the short rivers,- in both cases, the choice of

spent the summer in settlements near the

quiver, which sometimes had a small

the location was dependent on the exigencies

beach and moved to other houses in the

ikupasuy (prayer stick) attached to its

of hunting and fishing. Settlements were small,

interior of the islands during the winter

side. Bearskin hunting bags were of¬

and even Rayciska, the largest Ainu settlement

months. All settlements were located near

on the northwest coast of Sakhalin, had only

good fishing grounds, usually the mouth of a

ents, mixing bowl, and spare bamboo

twenty-five to fifty inhabitants. Population

river or a freshwater lake. Only children and

points. This set was collected by

mobility was higher than in Hokkaido, and

the elderly remained in the settlements all

Frederick Starr in Okotsonai in 1904.

during the summer men and women alike

year long,- at the beginning of the hunting

ten attached to the quiver to hold
one's strike-a-light kit, poison ingredi¬

(BMA 12.389B)

29.21 Mountain Knife

went on fishing and collecting excursions of

and fishing season all able-bodied men and

several days' duration.

women scattered across the island chain to

In addition to their belt knives, hunt¬
ers used “mountain knives” (tashiro)
to butcher animals and do heavy work
while out in the forest. Sheaths were
often made of a single piece of wood
that was split in two, hollowed out,
rejoined, and shrink-wrapped in wet
salmon skin. When the skin had
dried, it was replaced with cherry
bark. (FMC 131696/1-2)

29 / SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

217

29.23

Hunter on Skis

Skis were used for travel on hardpacked snow, as illustrated in this de¬
tail from Illustrations of Northern Ezo
(1855) by Rinzo Mamiya. (HML)

29.22

Snowshoes

In a country where winters were long
and snow was deep, transport was im¬
portant for survival. Ainu snowshoes
were made of bentwood frames with
leather or sinew thongs as foot sup¬
ports. Different shapes and sizes were
used for different snow conditions.
(UPM A407A-B)
29.23

summer camps that consisted of temporary
shelters. If they were not able to return to
their winter settlements before the stormy fall
season they had to face a difficult winter in
makeshift temporary huts. Until the nine¬
teenth century many Kurile Ainu lived in
pithouses dug into the ground and covered
with logs, sod, and thatch.
At least in southwestern Hokkaido, the
various kohw in one river valley formed a
group that regarded itself as the owner of the
surrounding territory whose borders were
formed either by the watersheds separating
the system of the river and its tributaries from
neighboring ones or by the tributaries them¬
selves. Extended river systems often had
several of these territorial groups. The mem¬
bers of such a group developed a deep feeling
of unity and were identified by the name of
the river followed by the words tin kur-. Saruun-kur meant 'people of the Saru River valley."
The territoiy thus formed was called iwor, and
Saru-un-kur-iwor was the stretch of land ex¬
ploited by the Saru River Ainu, and each kotan
laid claim to adjacent territory that provided
subsistence resources such as salmon spawn¬
ing grounds, deer- and bear-hunting areas,
etc.,- these areas were called kotan-un-iwor (Izumi
1951,- H. Watanabe 1973: 56).
Actually, the land did not count as
property per se; rather, the members of the
territorial group had the exclusive right to
exploit the natural resources. Outsiders had

218

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H

D

OLSCHLECER

the right to trespass on public ways, but they

therefore the hunters tried to assure success

were not allowed to hunt or fish without

in every possible way. The bear was also

paying the local group some compensation. In

regarded as a supreme deity whose ghost had

this way, differences in the distribution of

to be appeased carefully. Before leaving, the

natural resources were overcome. To fully

elders of the kotan were assembled to ask for

enjoy these privileges, they had to become

the support of the kamuy. During the walk to

members of the kotan, which could only be

the bear-hunting grounds, in aw (sacred

achieved with the unanimous consent of all

shaved sticks) were carved at every resting

heads of the residing families and after joining

place to seek the favor of the local deities.

one of the patrilineal kin groups (shine itokpa).

Special rules of behavior had to be followed

The rights to use specific places in a kotan-un-

during the bear hunt, and certain words were

iwor related to hunting, fishing, or gather¬

to be avoided: in Sakhalin, the word for seal,

ing— for instance, favorite spots to set a

tukara, was replaced by sinuye, meaning tattoo

spring bow, build a deer fence, a weir, or a

(Ohnuki-Tierney 1974: 21),- in Hokkaido,

fishing hut, were owned by individual families

the word for salt, shippo, was replaced with

or by cooperative groups,- even meadows

urn (ashes) (Munro 1962: 1 14). Likewise, the

where especially potent Aconitum plants could

bear hunters in Sakhalin could not sing or

be found were treated this way.

play instruments.

The Ainu of the northwest coast of

After the bear was killed, inaw-kike were

southern Sakhalin did not have any territorial

made to decorate the bears head, the kamuy

organization comparable to the iwor of

were thanked for the successful outcome of

Hokkaido. Officially, the right to hunt and fish

the hunt, and the blood of the bear was drunk,

in the vicinity of a kotan was reserved for the

for it was considered a divine medicine. After

agnatic kinship that formed the nucleus of that

returning to the village, a feast was held

particular settlement, but as kinship relations

during which the elders of the kotan once

were widespread between the villages, nearly

more expressed their gratitude for the safe

everyone could rightfully hunt everywhere.

return of the hunters. The head of the killed

The spring hunt for sea mammals was not

bear, resting in the place of honor near the

restricted in any way, except by physical

sacred window, was offered food and drink in

conditions of the ice itself (Ohnuki-Tierney

a ceremony resembling that performed during

1974: 83-84). The Ainu of the eastern coast of

the ritual sending home of the bear cub

Sakhalin are reported to have divided the river

If a human being had been killed by a

valleys into privately owned territories, and no

bear, the hunters immediately took up the

one except the owner was entitled to hunt or

chase of the animal and killed it. Cursing and

fish in a given area (Pilsudski 1912: 136).

striking out with their long hunting knives,

Rituals Related to Hunting

before taking its body to the place where the

and Fishing

person had been killed. The bear was decapi¬

the men then marched around the dead bear

Hunting and fishing were surrounded by a

tated and half of its skull was buried together

variety of rituals, which is to be expected

with the victim, the other half was placed

considering the importance of these activities

on top of the grave. If the dead person had

for Ainu well-being and survival. Correct

already been buried, the bear's head was

behavior toward animals, regarded as visitors

thrown into a bog, thereby consigning it to

from their heavenly abode, made sure that they

a kind of "hell" (Batchelor 1901: 471-78).

returned to earth again and again to make

Before the first salmon started to ascend

themselves available as food and useful

the rivers of Hokkaido to their spawning

materials. Various rituals also assured the safety

grounds, the Ainu held a ritual to assure their

and success of hunters. Before any fishing or

arrival. During this rite, which was directed by

hunting excursion, the kamuy—most impor¬

the headman and attended by other family

tantly Fuchi, the fire goddess—were offered

leaders, Fuchi and the kamuy of the river were

prayers. Curled sacred shavings (inaw-kike) were

prayed to and in aw were set near the spawning

always carried along on hunting expeditions in

grounds. The first salmon caught was sent to

the belief that it made the hunter invisible to

the kotan headman who offered it to Fuchi,-

evil spirits (Munro 1962: 1 12).

likewise, the first dog salmon eaten in each

The bear hunt was considered to be the
most dangerous Ainu hunting enterprise, and

29/SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

house was offered to the same kamuy. This
salmon was cut open with the knife used for

219

29.24

29.24 Salmon-skin Boots
with Fishscale Tread

These elegant salmon-skin boots were
collected by Alexandra Pogoski in Sa¬
khalin before 1893 and appear never
to have been used. Salmon-skin boots
were extremely durable and so were
worn by most coastal Ainu. (FMC
32116 a, b)

29.25 Nonskid Boots
Salmon-skin boots (chep-keri) were
mainly worn from winter to spring for
mountain walking. Their soles had fishscales pointing backwards to provide
traction on the snow, ice, and mud; the
backfin was left in the middle of the
sole for the same purpose. Such boots
were dry and light, but dried grass was
added for extra insulation, and bark fi¬
ber was used for socks. This set was
obtained by Romyn Hitchcock in Bekkai,
Hokkaido, in 1888. (NMNH E150637)

220

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/ H.

D.

OLSCHLECER

carving inaw, and the fish's mandible was tied

for example, "to row" and "boat” (Ohnuki-

to an inaw and thrown into the river after the

Tierney 1974: 25).

fishing season ended. This ritual was called
petorun kamuy-nomi, and its purpose was to see

29.26 Grapevine Sandals

Sandals (situker) of grapevine bark

By the turn of century, the Ainu way of
hunting and fishing had disappeared, either

the fish spirits off and ensure a plentiful run the

forbidden by Japanese laws or made impossible

following year (H. Watanabe 1973: 72-73,-

by the near-extinction of Sika deer by Japanese

Kono and Fitzhugh, this volume).

hunters. Consequently, hunting rituals also

Sakhalin also had many different hunt¬

disappeared, but in recent times some have

were used in summer for walking

ing rituals, especially relating to sea mammal¬

been revived as an integral part of the Ainu

gathering plants. Although brittle

hunting, in which taboos had to be observed.

ethnic renewal that began in the 1970s,- it is

when dry, grapevine bark that was

The kamuy of the sea were believed to dislike

hoped that interest in Ainu rituals will reveal

freshly stripped could be woven

several species of plants that therefore were

how important they were in eveiyday Ainu life

on slippery rocks while fishing and

into a tough cushion, ideal for soles.

strictly forbidden on hunting excursions on

and will encourage new approaches to the use

the open sea. As in bear hunting, several

and conservation of these resources and their

words in everyday use had to be replaced,

habitats in modern-day Fdokkaido.

This pair, which has straps of twisted
linden bark, was collected in Hokkaido
in 1876 by Benjamin Lyman.
(NMNH E22194)

29.26

191 SUBSISTENCE

TECHNOLOGY

22 1

V

ARIOUS ARCHIVAL MATERIALS AND

The Ainu on
Whales and
Whaling
Masami I wasaki-Goodman
AND MASAHIRO NOMOTO

Our ancestors utilized whales
that were stranded on their shores
or that they hunted. I am an

the seventeenth century recorded that the

Y. Watanabe 1992,- Akimichi,

Ainu used whale both as food and for trade. A

1984, 1994) discuss the impor¬

Dutch explorer who came to Hokkaido to

tant role that whales (humpe) have played

search for gold and silver noted, "the food and

in Ainu life. Descriptions of Ainu utilizing

nutrition source for them [Ainu] were fish,

whales are abundant in archaeological records,

whale blubber, fish oil, wild plants and rose

in journals written by early explorers of

hips that are abundant" (Kitagamae 1991). He

Hokkaido, and in Ainu folktales, songs, and

also describes trade between Ainu and

dances. Moreover, interviews with Ainu elders

Japanese, listing among Ainu trade items fish

who recall the old days reveal how the Ainu

oil, whale blubber, smoked whale tongue,

continued to benefit from whales in more

pelts of various kinds of animals, and bird

recent times, within the life span of the elder

feathers (ibid.), and notes that the local people

generation. In this essay we use available data

knew how to hunt whales. A similar descrip¬

to reconstruct the relationship between Ainu

tion recorded by officials of the Tsugaru fief

and whales in the past and to examine the

reported that the Ainu traded whale meat to

effort by the present Ainu to renew these ties.

the Japanese (Habara 1939,- Okuyama 1966,

Ainu living in the present day,

Abe 1984). Interesting observations are also

and I would like to talk
about this as part of the proud

The explorers who visited Hokkaido in

recent publications (including

Archival Studies

recorded by Daigo Shinbei Sadatsugu, whose

The best-known archaeological material that

ancestor Daigo Shinbei founded the commer¬

Our pride in those traditions

suggests that the people living in Hokkaido

cial whaling industry in Katsuura, Chiba

will he the basis for renewing

used whales from ancient times is a bone

Prefecture (Fukuyama 1943). Sadatsugu began

container—possibly a needlecase—found in

a whaling operation in Hokkaido in 1856, and

a shell mound on Benten Island in Nemuro.

as he traveled through the southern and

An engraving on this container (fig. 3.19)

eastern parts of Hokkaido he observed that

traditional culture of our people.

our ethnic identity as Ainu.
— Masahiro Nomoto

depicts several people hunting a large marine

the Ainu people in this area were hunting

mammal, which looks like a whale (Akimichi

whales with harpoons. Archival materials of

1994). Whether the people shown on this

the same period mention that Ainu utilized
whales stranded on the beaches (Abe 1984)
and describe the rules governing the distribu¬
tion of stranded whales, noting that it was the
chief who made decisions concerning appor¬
tioning of whale products (Okuyama 1966). In
short, numerous documentary sources indicate
that whales were a significant part of the
subsistence life of the Ainu in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries.

Place-Names, Folktales,
Songs, and Dances
Place-names throughout Hokkaido reflect the
Ainu relationship with whales: among the
mountains and rivers including humpe and umpe
(a modified form of humpe) in their names are
Mt. Humpe, Humpe Sapa (whale head),
30.1

Launching a Boat

For sea travel Ainu adapted dugouts by

container were ancestors of the present Ainu

Humpe waterfall, Humpe Eto Cape, and Umpe

and whether the animal is really a whale are

River. The names in one locale, Shiraoi, reflect

questions that require further clarification, but

an old Ainu folktale about a kamuy (god) who

this piece and other archaeological evidence

was grilling whale meat skewered on a mugwort

shapes were made for varying condi¬

indicate that people in Hokkaido have hunted

stick. When the stick broke, making a sharp

tions, from small shallow-river punts to

whales since at least the late Jomon era (about

noise, the kamuy was frightened, jumped up,

large seagoing sailing vessels up to

4000 to 2000 years ago) and passed these

and fell to the ground on his buttocks. The

building up the sides with planks that
overlapped and were lashed together
with cordage. Different sizes and

fifty feet in length that carried crews of
eight to ten people. Most vessels were
more modest, like this one used by a

traditions down through the succeeding

hollowed-out place where he landed came to

Okhotsk culture (a.D. 500-1200) to the

be known as Osorokotsu, and the rock in front

single fisherman who worked inshore

modern Ainu of today (see Yamaura and

of the hollow is called Imanitsu and represents

waters. (NAA 98-10413)

Ushiro, this volume).

the stick for grilling meat (Yamada 1984).

222

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M.

I W AS A K I - C OODM A N

AND

M. NOMOTO

Stranded-Whale Dance

These place-names are still used and remind

The Stranded-Whale Dance (fig. 30.2),

The Ainu of the Shiraoi region have

local people of the special connection Ainu

which Ainu perform at festive occasions, is an

had with whales in the old days.

expression of magical thinking: Ainu believed

30.2

conducted whale dances for genera¬
tions and continue to do so at the
Ainu Museum at Shiraoi. The dance

Th is relationship is also evident in other

that presenting their wish for a whale to
strand on their beach by performing respect¬

is based on an old story in which

Ainu folktales, songs, and dances. Whales,

a blind woman discovers a stranded

which brought wealth to the Ainu, were

ful dances and rituals would make it happen.

whale on the beach (represented

thanked through the telling of stories,

There are regional differences in how this

singing, and dancing. By these activities Ainu

dance is performed, but everywhere its

asked the gods to continue providing them

purpose is the same—to express thanks to

here by the woman in repose). She
runs to tell her village, and people
return with knives and baskets,
singing songs and dancing to thank

with whales. One of these songs tells of

the gods. Masahiro Nomoto, who observed a

the gods for this gift. (AMS)

stranded whales (Chiri 1986):

Stranded-Whale Dance in Shiraoi describes

A large whale was stranded
30.3

Whalebone Knife

Whales provided a variety of impor¬

Oh, how joyful

that performance :
A woman who imitates a whale covers

The god came down on a carriage.

herself with a robe and lies on the ground.

Whalebone was also used for making

I am a very large whale

A person performing as a blind elderly

artifacts and implements like this

From above the garden

woman comes in, walking with a stick,

mountain knife (tashiro) bound with

By cold air and wind

and trips over the whale. She feels the

cherry-bark wrapping. (MPM

I am blown high.

whale with her stick and hands and

N17357A/B)

“Humpe kamuy ifunke" (a lullaby of the

tant materials used as food and oil.

whale god) recounts another old Ainu story

realizes what it is. She shouts to the
villagers and they come down with bags
on their backs, singing the whale song.

about the god of the whale who wanted to

They fill their bags with meat. Squawking

marry a human woman (Sapporo Terebi 1983).

crows gather from different directions and

Fde took the form of a human and promised

try to snatch bits of the meat, but the

Ainu villagers he would send whales to their

villagers chase them away. After the

shore if he were permitted to marry a local
woman. Following their marriage, the villagers
were blessed with whales that became stranded
on their shore. This story expresses the joy

villagers have divided up the whale, they
go home singing songs The crows have
their share after the people leave. When
the crows have gone, only the robe is left
on the ground.

that whales brought to the Ainu.
30 / WHALES AND WHALING

223

They cut whale meat into large chunks and
cooked it in ocean water to season it with
salt (Natori 1974). In recent interviews, an
Ainu from the Kushiro area recalled how h'e
cooked whale in the old days:
A whale would sometimes get stranded.
One time, in early spring, a whale got
stranded, having been caught in the sea
ice. We had kamuynomi, a ritual to worship
the gods, for the humpe god. After helping
to flense the whale, 1 got my share. 1 had
enough to fill the bag on my back. 1
cooked it in salt water and ate it as a
snack. I also made oil out of it and kept it
in a bottle. I have never heard about a
"whale-sending ceremony," but we raised
a tuki [a ceremonial cup], prayed, and ate
the head of the whale.
Although whale-sending ceremonies may not
be performed or be well remembered today,
a scene from a late-nineteenth-century Ainu-e
in the Brooklyn Museum of Art that shows
parts of a killer whale (Orca) in an Ainu ritual
altar (mtsa) suggests that they must have
occurred in the past (C. Dubreuil, personal
communication, 1998).
Ainu used whale for many purposes other
than food and cooking. Whale oil was used for
lighting, and baleen, which can be stripped
down into thin flexible strands, was used for
lashing wood pieces together in boat constmction. Whalebone was used to make harpoon
heads (kite) for hunting sea mammals (Natori
30.4

Ikupasuy Carvings

Whales, bears, and salmon are com¬
mon themes on ikupasuy, prayer sticks

Such folktales, dances, and songs of whales

1974; Kayano 1978), and a large and beau¬

have been maintained and are performed by

tifully carved whalebone knife handle and

younger generations of Ainu.

scabbard exist in the Ainu collection at

used by men when conducting ceremo¬

the Milwaukee Public Museum (fig. 30.3,-

nies honoring the gods. The two out¬

Ainu Speak of Whales

C. Dubreuil, personal communication, 1998).

salmon; whales and boats are the

In various interviews Ainu have talked about

The most precise description of whaling

central motifs on the inside pieces.

how they used whales. Mr. Tasuke Yamamoto,

operations by Ainu was recorded by Natori

a respected Ainu elder from Kushiro, empha¬

(1974), who conducted an interview in 1945

side pieces feature bear heads and

The choice of motif probably indicates
which important diety was to be

sized that Ainu never wasted whale resources:

with an Ainu elder who had taken two whales.

emblemized a personal narrative—

"When we get a whale, we dig a big hole in the

The elder described whaling as practiced

an experience while hunting or an

beach within reach of the tide and we bury the

nearly one hundred years ago:

encounter with a particular animal—

whale there. We make sure that the hole is

One day, we were fishing off the shore of

deep enough so that water keeps running into

Oshamanbe and at about nine in the

honored. Some of these carvings

while others derived from folklore,
ceremony, or epics. (BMA 12.297,
12.247, 12.298, 12.326)

the hole. This keeps the whale from spoiling.
Ainu know the best way" (Shin'ya 1979).
Whales were most commonly used for
food. Ainu liked whale as much as they liked

The weight of the harpoon made it go
deep into the whale. The whale jumped
up, then dived deep into the sea and swam

eating deer and bear (Batchelor 1925). Ainu

around in a circle. An hour later, when the

rendered whale oil and ate it in soup. In

whale came up to the surface and blew out

another interview, an elderly man talked

water, I threw the second harpoon, and the

about using whale oil for cooking: "Every day
I heated up some whale oil until it melted and
poured it over my cooked potatoes. I also
fried vegetables in it. It lasted two years."

224

morning, I saw a whale—a minke whale.
The elder threw the first kite [harpoon].

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M.

whale went down again. When the whale
came up to the surface an hour and a half
later, Shiromare threw the third harpoon.
The whale dragged us around. . . . When it
became dark . . . ten boats with strong men

IWASAKI-GOODMAN

AND

M. NOMOTO

Elderly people who were present at that
time conducted a simple ritual to send off the
spirit of the stranded whale after flensing it.
The prayer given at the ritual was as follows:
"We deeply thank you for coming down to
visit our village. You might be feeling lonely
for being away from your parents. You came
down for us utari [relatives] and brought us
your presents of meat and blubber. We
appreciate it very much."
In 1985 many elderly people born
between Meiji 31(1899) and Taisho 12
(1923) were interviewed in Shiraoi about
whales and orcas.
We did not go hunting for whales.
Rather, we got whales more or less
accidentally when they were chased by
orcas and became stranded. Once, after
World War II, we got a whale weighing
about two tons. The elders prayed to the
god of the ocean [the killer whale] and
the whale was flensed. Afterward, they
held kamuy-nomi in order to cleanse the
beach. When we hunt a whale, we do not
go out with the sole intention of catching
a whale. We used the same kite [harpoon]
that we used to fish for swordfish (Ainu
30.5, 30.6

Killer Whale Marks

from Rebunge village joined us. We were so

Representations of the orca or killer

happy we almost cried. The men prayed to

whale are symbolic elements seen on

a god and threw their harpoons into the

ikupasuy; these special marks

whale. . . . When the whale was landed on

(shiroshi) identify the man's lineage.

the shore, many people gathered.

Shiroshi are always placed on the

Ainu elder offered inatv [sacred shaved

underside of the ikupasuy and some¬
times take the form of a stylized orca

. . An

sea monster (center) were collected

It became clear in the interviews that
by this time Ainu no longer had the right to
use stranded whales. When a whale became
stranded, it was the local Japanese fishermen

sticks] and spread a mat beside the whale

who had a proprietary right to stranded

and prayed to god.

whales. This traditional right had been taken

Natori also examined the harpoon head

away from the Ainu by the Japanese.

backfin. These ikupasuy with a whale
carving (top and detail, bottom) and a

Minzoku Hakubutsukan 1985).

that Ainu used for whaling. He reported that

Of all the various whale species, the orca

before 1893 by Alexander Agassiz from

after the harpoon head penetrated the whale's

brought Ainu wealth by chasing whales and

Nemuro in eastern Hokkaido, where

body, it became detached from the shaft and

other fish and sea mammals onto their

turned sideways so that it stayed tight,

beaches. Orca was regarded as the highest-

whales were common and ceremonies
honoring them were held frequently in
the past. (PMC 51647, 51646)

toggled inside the body. Amu also used

ranking god of the ocean, as high as the bear

poison taken from Aconitum, also known as

god on land. The motif that depicts the backfin

monkshood, a blue-flowered poisonous herb

of an orca, called asbipe in Ainu, is found in

of the buttercup family, to increase their

Ainu carvings not only in the coastal region

efficiency in hunting whales.
In various interviews, experiences with

but in other areas as well (Ainu Bunka Hozon
Taisaku Kyogikai 1969,- C. Dubreuil, personal

stranded whales have been reported. One Ainu

communication). An orca pattern (fig. 30.5) is

elder in Shiraoi talked about a whale stranding

also used as one of the Ainu crests that were

that he had witnessed in his youth: "On June 8,

inherited through the paternal line and that

1949, two orca chased a whale ashore at

identifies a male Ainu lineage (Natori 1974,-

Shiraoi. While it was struggling, waves washed

Maraini 1994). An elder in Shiraoi spoke

it higher onto the beach. Farther out in the

about his past experience with orcas:

ocean the killer whales were squeaking and
jumping, appearing to be angry about the
Ainu stealing their prey. The whale was three
ken [about fifteen feet, or five meters] long
and was a baby" (Fujimura 1976).

30/ WHALES AND WHALING

Orca have a strong kamuy. They are found
in areas where sirikap [swordfish] live and
are so fierce that none can deal with
them. That is why it is called kamuy. 1
once had a frightening experience with
orca, and thought I would be attacked.

225

Several orcas together can even attack a

I have a strong feeling toward the orca that

whale. When we are fishing in the ocean,

the crest symbolizes,- I am proud to use the

sometimes repun-kamuy [orcas] come near
our boat. When this happens, we are
supposed to give some of our lunch to

mark and feel a strong responsibility for it."
An effort to revitalize the traditional

them by throwing it in the ocean. It is said

relationship that Ainu had with whales is also

the god of the ocean will eat it and give

seen in the reconstruction of kamuyrini, an

fisherman a good catch and a safe trip

assemblage that includes wooden figures

(Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan 1985).

suspended from a plate shaped like an orca
(Aoki 1990). Included among the figures are

Revitalizing Ainu Whale Culture

images of whales, dolphins, sea otters, and

Although the traditional Ainu relationship with

other marine mammals that were thought to

whales has changed through time, especially due

be brought to shore by orcas. Kamuyrini were

to the termination of aboriginal whaling, whales

often centerpieces of family areas, which

and whaling still remain part of the Ainu legacy

included personal treasures, and they were

and modern belief system. Because of recent

the locus for prayer in the home. A kamuyrini

efforts to revitalize Ainu traditional culture, more

assembled in 1990 near Yoichi (Otaru) in

Ainu today are familiar with folktales telling how

western Hokkaido shows that the repun-kamuy

Ainu benefited from whales in the past. More

belief has been revitalized and is being

Ainu have begun dancing the Stranded-Whale

maintained into the present.

Dance and singing whale songs, but the motiva¬

Canada and the United States (such as the

one hundred years ago. Ainu now perform these

Makah of Washington state) are making an

dances and songs to revitalize traditional Ainu

intensive effort to resume whaling after de¬

culture in the present day. Although the Ainu

cades in which it was not practiced. They

ancestors danced the Stranded-Whale Dance to

emphasize that it is important for aboriginal

entice whales onto the land, their descendants

people of today to inherit the whaling tra¬

who dance the same dance today are searching

ditions of their ancestors as a base for renew¬

for their Ainu identity.

ing their ethnic identity. Clearly those

The crest of the orca (fig. 30.5), which

groups that have a tradition of utilizing whale

is worshiped as the god of the ocean, is used

resources have maintained their relationship

by a number of Ainu carvers and others who

with whales into the present.

conduct rituals. The crest functions as an

30.7

Recently, some aboriginal groups in

tion for these activities is different from that of

On the other side of the Pacific Ocean,

identification of their own lineage and at the

Japanese aboriginal people have begun efforts

same time gives pride to those who inherit

to revitalize those ancient traditions that link

traditional Ainu culture. A young man who

them with whales. Modern Ainu are taking

inherited the orca crest says: "I am using the

steps to reestablish their ethnic identity,

mark of repun-kamuy, the orca, which is carved

recognizing that its foundation lies in Ainu

on the ceremonial cup that we have at home.

traditional culture.

Humpback Whale

Whales continue to be important to the
Ainu today, although more for spiritual
than economic reasons. Takeki Fujito, a
famous Ainu sculptor, envisioned a
humpback whale about to surface in
this carving he completed in 1993.
(Takeki Fujito Collection)

226

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M.

IWASAKI-COODMAN

AND

M. NOMOTO

T

he traditional Ainu village

31/Home and
Settlement:
Kotan and Chise
Masahiro Nomoto

31.1

Ainu Mosir, Kamuy Mosir

This painting (1984) by Tetsuo Kitaichi
illustrates the Ainu world (Ainu mosir)
seen from the perspective of the family

separated from each other by approximately

was called a kotan, meaning

150-to-350-foot-wide (forty-five to one

"community" or "village" (fig. 31.1)

hundred meter) wooded areas,- similarly, each

Although the Ainu continue to use

kotan was surrounded by a resource zone, or

this word to refer to the places where they live,

iwor, from which residents drew sustenance

few of their modern villages resemble the old

through hunting and gathering.

kotan because most communities where Ainu
today live are more like towns or cities. Within

The basic criterion for a kotan location
was that it be near a river where salmon ran

the kotan were individual houses, called chise.

that was also large enough for boat transport. It

This essay describes the traditional organization

was also important that it be located near such

of the Shiraoi Ainu kotan, the spatial arrange¬

mountain food resources as deer and bears or

ment and construction of the chise as well Ainu

to ocean resources like whales, seals, and

social and political organization, and the changes

swordfish. The availability of firewood, nuts,

that have occurred since 1868 when the Meiji

wild plants, bark to make clothing, and housing

Restoration initiated an active Japanization

materials was another important consideration.

process (Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan 1993: 7■

Marshlands were important for their cattails,

Mitsuoka 1987: 211).

which were used to make mats, raincoats, and

Kotan

roof thatch. Each kotan population determined

Although it seems likely that Ainu economic

the area in which it would obtain vital natural

and political organization was more complex

resources, and these resource areas were part of

before the Japanese appeared in their lands, for

the kotan territory,- each village was ideally a

the past two hundred years the kotan has been

self-sustaining, independent economic unit.

animals, plants, and other necessary

the highest unit of traditional Ainu social life.

The borders between kotan were set by natural

resources are carefully depicted, as

The basic Ainu kotan comprised a group of

rivers and mountains: a main river channel

are traditional practices and spiritual

scattered houses—from a few to a dozen or

separated kotan whose territories conformed to

more. Coastal settlements were usually located

tributary streams on either side,- when moun¬

and its home (chise)-, the village (kotan)
and its surrounding lands (iwor) with

aspects of Ainu life. The world of gods

(kamuy mosir) is represented by the owl

near the mouths or deltas of rivers, where

tain ridges and hills set the borders, the bound¬

of bears and other animals, and the

salmon fishing and ocean fishing were

aries ran straight down the axis of the ridge to

spirits of deceased humans. Mediation

productive and boats could be hauled out of

the ocean.

between the two worlds is accom¬

the reach of the sea, and inland kotan were

(protector of the village), by the gods

plished by ritual and prayers transmit¬

Records from the Edo period indicate

often located near marshlands or where

that the average kotan supported from five to

ted to the gods by human prayers, with

tributaries ran into a main river. Most villages

ten chise and populations of twenty-five to

the bear-sending ceremony (iyomante),

were located directly on rivers, which provided

fifty people,- these numbers varied regionally

in which bear gods are sent back to

opportunities for both transportation and

according to kotan territory size and the

the god world. (AMS)

fishing. Within a kotan, houses were usually

abundance of available resources.

the aid of ikupasuy, and by rituals like

3 1 / KOTAN

AND CHISE

227

tions, beginning with the selection of the
house site and the location of its fireplace
(Takabeya 1939,- Takabeya and Takakura
1969). Among the factors influencing site
location were its convenience in terms of
facilitating the activities of daily life,- proper¬
ties of the river (propensity to flood, for
example),- sun exposure,- wind and air circula¬
tion,- availability of nuts and wild plants,- and
the potential for growing cereal crops such as
31.4

Shell Lamp

Inside the chise, light was provided by
scallop-shell lamps (ratcako) fueled by

Chise

foxtail millet and Japanese millet. The next

Because of their geographic proximity, both

consideration was the proper placement of

Japan and continental Asia influenced Ainu

the fireplace, which would be the home of

traditions, but these cultural contacts were

the fire goddess that protected the house and

fish or marine-mammal oil and fitted
with a marsh rush or cotton rag wick.
(NMNH E150701)

31.2

Ainu Village in Winter

The Ainu kotan at the Ainu Museum at
Shiraoi is seen here in winter with its

localized and their impact on the varieties and

its occupants. To determine if a particular

construction materials of the traditional Ainu

spot were suitable, a fire was lit there and a

house (chise) used in Hokkaido, Sakhalin, and

ground-purifying ceremony was held,-

the Kurile Islands differed from region

through the fire goddess, the head of the

to region. By around 1900 Amu houses in

household asked the god of the land for

houses, elevated storehouses, and

Sakhalin were often of plank or log construc¬

permission to use the site for a home, and

bear cages. (AMS)

tion, reflecting both the colder climate and

similar requests were made to the gods of the

31.3

the influence of Siberian styles in this area

river and its waters. Permission was considered

(Yamamoto 1943: 360), whereas in the

granted if the household head had no bad

At Ikorek’s House

On May 22, 1901, Hiram Hiller jotted in
his journal,"photoed the inside of

Kuriles, where there were no forests, pit-

dreams for seven days. If such omens appeared,

houses based on housing traditions of Okhotsk

it indicated the presence of an evil god, and

and Satsumon predecessors were still in use

it was then necessary to change the location

Ikorek’s house—two plates of the
fireplace.” The location was Fucani,
near Monbetsu, Hokkaido. His report
described the scene: The fire-box

(Hitchcock 1891a). The origin of the Hok¬

of the house or hearth or to hold a special

occupies the center of the room, and is

kaido Ainu house described below is unclear,

ceremony to purify the land (Takakura 1969).

the very center of the household as well.
A space three or four feet wide by five or
six feet long is filled with earth and

but it was already in use when descriptions of
Ainu culture began to appear in historical

ashes. They use stones for pot-rests; a

documents around 1400. What follows is a

shelf suspended from the rafters swings

description of the Ainu house based on

a few feet above the fire-box and from

practices followed in the Shiraoi region of

this shelf hang the pot hooks. Upon the

southern Hokkaido (fig. 31.2).

most of their light is derived from this

228

(fig. 3 1.5). In general the house was rectangu¬

Choosing a Location

entrance vestibule and a storeroom. Its dimen¬

Nearly everything about the building and

sions were determined by family size, but in

organization of the Hokkaido Ainu chise was

general houses were about twelve by eighteen

fireplace, and the whole family life
centers about this box of earth and
ashes. (UPM archives)

precise plan that reflected the Ainu worldview

or additional rooms or annexes, except for an

often mats covered with millet or beans,
This is the fireplace. All of their heat and

The chise itself was laid out according to a

lar in shape and lacked internal compartments

shelf are kept a few cooking utensils and
or meat and fish are hung there to cure.

Typical Floor Plan

determined by a set of rules based upon

feet (four to six meters). The house timbers

practical considerations and spiritual sanc-

were made from small trees lashed together

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M

NOMOTO

31.5, 31.6

Floor Plan

The typical Shiraoi Ainu house, entered
through an anteroom in the west end,
was laid out around a central rectangu¬
lar hearth where most everyday activi¬
ties took place. Family treasures were
stored in lacquerware containers along
an elevated platform in the northeast
corner of the house or were hung on
the walls behind them. Guests of honor
were seated at the east end of the
room near the god's window, which was
reserved for the passage of gods. Out¬
side this window stood the ritual altar
□ □

or nusa. (HML, AMS)

with grapevines and bark. Depending on

located on the south side, and a small annex

the availability of local materials, the walls

was built on the west end for storing equipment

and roof were covered with bark or a thatch

and firewood. The door consisted of a straw

of Japanese nutmeg, reeds, or bamboo grass.

mat or blinds made of Japanese nutmeg or reed.

The form of the roof was particularly

In the center of the single interior room

important and had symbolic meaning,- it was

was a central rectangular fireplace (fig. 3 1.6)

based on two tripod-shaped elements called

with two carving stands at the east end where

ketounni (waist of a house) that were erected

men could sit and create sacred shaved sticks

at either end of the house and supported the

(inaw) or carve wooden implements (fig. 3 1.8),-

central roof beam. The tripod shape was also

inaw (fig. 31.7) erected to the fire goddess

important in the ground-purifying ceremony:

were placed at the northeast corner near this

a small pothook decorated with sacred wood

carving stand. All the daily prayers and

shavings (inaw-kike) was suspended over the

prayers for ceremonies took place at this

ritual fire from a cross-beam between two

location, hire tongs, an ash leveler, and other

small tripods. Construction ceremonies like

tools were found around the fireplace. Above

this are not relics of the past, for they are

the fireplace were racks for drying and smok¬

still practiced by some Ainu people today

ing fish,- an apparatus used to suspend pots

when building modern houses.

over the fire was also hung over the hearth.

The typical Shiraoi house had its long

The space above the rafters was used for

axis oriented in an east-west direction, which

drying food and for storing mats, reeds, and

was especially important for the proper place¬

other materials.

ment of the windows. Every house had three

The chise floor was prepared by spread¬

small windows, one on the east side and two

ing grass upon the dirt and covering this with

on the south side. The east window, called

two layers of matting: first, a cover of mats

god's window (kamuy-puyar), was reserved for

woven from Japanese nutmeg or reeds, and

the use of gods entering and leaving the house.

then a final surface of woven cattail matting.

People never looked through this window

The elders today who used to live in these

except during ceremonies and other special

traditional houses say that this type of layered

occasions. The more easterly window on the

floor allowed the heat from the fireplace to

south wall let sunlight into the room, and the

spread through the matting and warm the floor.

wall beneath it was removable so that fish or

The northeast corner of the chise had a

other materials needing processing could be

slightly raised floor that was reserved for

brought more easily into the house,- the

worshipping the gods of the house, of hunt¬

southwest window provided light to the

ing, and of rearing children. Lacquerware,

kitchen area. The entrance to the kitchen was

swords, and other valuables obtained by trade

3 I / KOTAN

AND CHISE

229

from the Japanese were placed on this plat¬
form. The number of these items displayed
were a source of pride and gave some indica¬
tion of a family's wealth.
Building a House
House construction (figs. 3 1.9a-d) began by
assembling the rectangular roof on the ground:
beams were cut to required dimensions and
bound together,- the two tripods that formed
the opposite ends of the roof were erected and
31.9a-d

Ainu House Construction

The process of building an Ainu
house is illustrated in this series of

joined by a connecting roof beam,- lateral
beams were inserted into notches along the
sides of the frame and lashed down,- and cross¬

Ainu-e by Shimanojo Murakami from
Illustrations of Ainu Livelihood,

beams needed to support the roofing materials

painted in the early nineteenth cen¬

were then lashed into place horizontally along

tury. Construction began by measur¬

the sides of the inclined beams (fig. 31,9b).

ing and cutting logs (a), erecting the

The next step was to dig holes for insertion of

roof frame (b), raising the roof frame
onto forked wall posts (c), and cov¬
ering the house exterior with
bundles of grass thatch (d). (HML)

the wall posts, whose tops were notched to fit
into the roof frame and were angled slightly
inwards to help bear the weight of the roof.

hearth. At the climax of this celebration, the
head of the household shot an arrow into the
ceiling to exorcize any evil spirits that
remained—only then was it safe for a family
to move into the house.
Soon after the house was finished, its
members completed work on peripheral
structures. An altar (nusa) consisting of a short
wall of reeds or matting was erected a few
meters outside the god's window,- this sacred
place was used during ceremonies to honor
the gods and send the spirits of animals back
to the god world (kamuy mosir). A cage for
housing animals—such as owls or bear cubs
caught in the mountains—was erected within
view of the house. This cage, made of a log
crib that was raised above the ground on stilts,
served as the home for gods in animal form
while they visited the kotan, and they lived
there until they were returned to kamuy mosir in
special sending ceremonies. A convenient spot

31.9b

31.9a

Finally, a group of people was assembled to lift
the roof frame up onto the wall posts (fig.
31,9c). After the roof framework had settled,
cross-beams were installed at intervals up the
side of the walls and the wall-covering materi¬
als lashed to them. Once the framework was
completed, the roof and walls were covered

was chosen for the storehouse, also built on
stilts, which held the family's winter food, and
racks for drying fish and wild plants were
erected nearby. Finally, separate toilets for
men and women were built, and special places
were designated for disposal of wastewater,
different kinds of trash, and fireplace ashes.

with layers of preassembled bundles of thatch
(figs. 3 1,9d, 31.11). Construction of the hearth

Political and Social Organization

signaled completion of the house,- the entryway

and Traditions

and storage shed were added last.

The kotan and chise were more than simply
places to live—they also represented the
political and religious organization that gov¬
erned all Ainu social traditions. Ainu society
was organized into groups based on male and
female genealogical lineages. Paternal lineage
handed down two traditions: ancestral family
marks or crests (itokpa) passed down from
father to son, and specific ritual practices

House construction took an average of
three to seven days to complete. When a cbise
was finished, people gathered for a ceremony
to bless the house and install its protective
god. The village elder lit the first fire in the
fireplace and carved the inaw that represented
Fuchi, the goddess of house and hearth,
placing it at the northeast corner of the

230

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/M. NOMOTO

31.7

Inaw

relating to dealings with the gods. These

Inaw, sacred shaved sticks represent¬

practices were never revealed to people

ing birds that carried men's prayers to

outside one's own patrilineage, and the ritu¬

the gods, were prominently displayed
in Ainu houses. Taking different forms

als associated with ceremonies honoring

for different purposes or for different

bears and killer whales or specific mountains

gods to which they were dedicated.

and places were especially important.

inaw had an important role in main¬

The maternal line also handed down

taining the safety and security of the

certain specific traditions, the most well

home. The most important inaw were

known of which was the construction and

those dedicated to Fuchi, the goddess
of the home, and were placed at the

design of a special woven belt (fig. 31.10)

northeast corner of the hearth box.

worn by women beneath their clothes. This

(AMS)

belt had the force of a special personal charm
and was acquired by a young woman from
her mother or grandmother when she first
began to menstruate. The power of each
individual matrilineage was evidenced by the
specific construction technique (length,
number of strands, etc.) and in the woven
pattern. The Ainu believed that without this
belt a woman would not find her rightful
place in the afterlife. Other important

traditions passed down through the female
line were particular clothing patterns and

31.8 Makiri for Carving inaw

styles of embroidery.

Men used special types of knives
to carve inaw. one was similar to

Human relationships in the kotan were

a regular man’s knive but had a

also determined by patrilineage. Men moving

wide hooked tip; another (fig.

into a new village had to cut their ties with

26.2) was a thin iron blade with

their former lineage and adopt the beliefs

a wooden block fitted to the end.
The block served to guide the

and rites of the dominant lineage in a formal

blade when shaving long, thin

ceremony conducted before the elders.

curls. (NMNH 324511)

Likewise, a woman who married into the
kotan had to adopt her husband's patrilineage
and its specific religious symbols, rituals, and
ceremonies. Memorial services for ancestors,
bear-sending rituals, and all other major
ceremonies were conducted by those in the
kotan and their blood relatives,- in this way
the dominant lineage of each kotan directed
the spiritual life of the community.
This hierarchy also determined the

3 1 / KOTAN

AND CHISE

231

became customary for this youngest child
to stay with his or her parents,- when the
youngest child married, the spouse would
move into the in-laws' home. For this reason
it was sometimes said that the Ainu trans¬
ferred the leadership of the family to the
youngest child.
The youngest child, however, did not
usurp the rights of elder siblings in matters
of inheritance. When the parents passed away,
the father's lacquerware, swords, rights to hunt¬
ing and fishing territories, and other important
possessions and entitlements were usually inher¬
ited by the oldest son who then assumed most

Woman’s Ritual Belt

location of dwellings within the kotan, with the

Both men and women wore special per¬

dwellings of the dominant male lineage in the

of the family's political and economic power.

center,- one of these wotild typically be the home

The mother's accessories, clothing, and work

of the village leader. When a kotan consisted

tools were handed down to her daughters.

was never seen even by her husband;

of only one clan, its leading elder, kotan-kor-kur

Handing down within one's male or female

its design, a special family-specific pat¬

(village-own-person), represented the kotan If

line—from fathers to sons and from mothers to

tern, was inherited from her mother and

a kotan had two lineages, the elder who was

daughters—ensured that the younger genera¬

grandmother. Such a belt functioned as

most eloquent and who had the best judgment

tion continued the Ainu traditions.

31.10

sonal charms that protected them from
harm and misfortune caused by evil
gods. A woman's belt was secret and

a spiritual chastity belt and was worn
continuously after a woman began to
menstruate. (AMS)

became kotan-kor-kur,- the kotan-kor-kur was
selected by mutual agreement among the

Changes After Japanese Contact

residents and was not a hereditary position.

Ainu began actively trading with the Japanese

Although such a leader held consider¬

in the Edo period (1615-1868), especially

able respect and influence, he did not hold

after Japanese fishing stations were estab¬

autocratic power,- his main duty was to confer

lished along the coast and Ainu were at¬

with other elders about issues involving diplo¬

tracted (or forced) to work there (Takakura

macy and administration of justice and to

I960,- Kayano 1994). People who had been

gather and determine consensus. He also

living in various scattered kotan began to live

arranged care for families without a household

near the fisheries because this was convenient

head or for childless elderly couples who

for the Japanese,- in the late Edo period, as

needed help. Because most kotan were orga¬

many as twenty or thirty households are

nized around a single paternal lineage in

recorded in a single village Under these

which respect for elders was paramount, vil¬

conditions, the traditional organization of the

lage life tended to function smoothly and with

Ainu kotan collapsed, and routine hunting

a minimum of friction and controversy.

ceremonies were no longer held because most

The typical Ainu family consisted of a

There were also changes in regional

all of whom lived together in one house. When

administration and the process by which village

children became older and married, they left

leaders were selected. The Japanese Matsumae

home,- men settled in nearby houses while young

domain that controlled Ezo established the

women usually married men from a different

policy of giving each kotan leader the title of

kotan. Thus, the Ainu family structure was the

otona, a Japanese term for the head of a patrilin¬

typical so-called nuclear family identified and

eal clan. Besides otona, the Japanese designated

studied by sociologists. The household leader

assistants and gift receivers,- the latter were to

—the father—was called cbise-kor-kur (house-

bring gifts from the Matsumae officials to the

own-person). Much as the spatial organization

villages. When groups of kotan from a certain

of the kotan reflected the patrilineage, the cbise,

area joined forces, overlords (so-otona) and

with its special seat reserved for the father,

underlords or assistant chiefs (waki-otona) were

expressed the organization of the family.

appointed as their representatives.

When a young man took a wife, the

232

of the men were working at the fishery.

husband, a wife, and their unmarried children,

These Japanese policies gradually

couple built a new home near the man's

replaced the traditional Ainu ways of govern¬

parents in the same kotan. As children married

ing their villages. The situation worsened for

and moved out, the youngest child often was

the Ainu in 1868 when the Meiji government

the last to remain with the parents, and it

encouraged Japanese emigration to Hokkaido

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/M

NOMOTO

Ainu Living Space Today
The form and location of the traditional chise
and kotan encompassed both practical and
spiritual considerations, while also reflecting
the unique social organization of the Ainu.
Modern Ainu can look to that heritage as
a source of inspiration as they work to
maintain their culture. For instance, though
Ainu today live in modern, Japanese-style
houses, they hold a traditional ceremony
before building the house, and a traditional
housewarming party takes place. Inaw are
commonly seen hanging on contemporary
houses, often over doorways, to ward off
evil spirits. New educational initiatives,
like the one at the Ainu Museum where six
restored chise are exhibited, have increased
demand for the traditional house. As Ainu
31.11 Traditional Ainu House

to begin farming and forestry operations in

cultural promotion continues, it is important

This house was constructed by Ainu

unsettled areas, thus encroaching upon the

that the Ainu themselves use the chise as a

rights of the indigenous Ainu as well as the

means to sustain their cultural identity

very land upon which they lived The result

without turning it into a simplistic cultural
icon or tourist attraction.

for the Ainu Museum at Shiraoi. Ainu
houses in other areas of Hokkaido
differed considerably from the Shiraoi
pattern, as seen in photographs of

was rapid destruction of the natural environ¬

other Ainu villages (e.g., figs. 22.1,

ment, which made it impossible for the Ainu

27.2). Many of the Kurile Ainu contin¬

to maintain their traditional subsistence

expression of the traditional kotan community

ued to live in pithouses until the

lifestyle and their close relationship to nature.

organization and land-use practices, because

nineteenth century, while Sakhalin
Ainu used Siberian-styie log houses.
(AMS)

It is more difficult to find a modern

Even more disastrous was the government

it is difficult today for Ainu to have access to

decree in 1877 that designated land tradition¬

a large range of land. Various government

ally owned by Ainu as "unowned" land,

initiatives—most lacking Ainu participa¬

making it available to Japanese settlers.

tion—have studied this problem: in 1996 a

Many kotan were located on the lower

report proposed the revival of the traditional

reaches of rivers and along the seashore

living space as a vehicle for the study, trans¬

where natural resources were plentiful,- these

mission, and preservation of Ainu culture,

areas were also the most suitable lands for the

and in 1997 the Hokkaido prefectural gov¬

Japanese settlers, and they quickly took them

ernment established a committee for the

from the Ainu. New regulations took life-

maintenance and study of traditional living

sustaining traditional rights to catch salmon

space. So far these initiatives have only

and trout away from the Ainu and gave them

produced exploitative activities that feature

to the Japanese. Ainu were also encouraged

the Ainu as cultural relics in tourist-oriented

to take up agriculture as a full-time occupa¬

memorial parks. What is needed now is for

tion but were given poor-quality land, which

the Ainu themselves to articulate the modern

left them unable to compete with Japanese

relevance of the social structure provided by

farming enterprises. In these and other ways,

kotan and iwor and to implement policies for

government policy eliminated the economic

new living spaces that they can be proud of,

base for Ainu culture, and its social focus, the

which link past and present, and which can

kotan, was completely destroyed.

inspire a new cultural strategy.

3 1 / KOTAN

AND CHISE

233

I

n the Ainu language the village is

of life, while trade introduced variety and

called kotan, and the wilderness around

environmental differences created distinct

the kotan where the resources—animals

traditions in Ainu culture. The year was divided

and plants—needed for life could be

into two seasons, winter and summer. According

Village

found was called iwor (fig. 32.1); together
they provided the basis for traditional Ainu

season while the summer belongs to women."

Work:

life. The kotan was usually comprised of two

This reflected the fact that hunting was the most

to six households surrounded by lands

important activity undertaken in winter, with

Gender Roles and
Seasonal Work
Mitsunori Keira and
Tqmoko Keira

to an Ainu saying, "The winter is the man's

sufficient to supply food and other living

bear and deer hunting being paramount, while

necessities without infringing on the lands of

summer was the season for gathering and

other villages. Today, of course, this tradi¬

processing plants, which was directed by

tional life is gone, but even though it no

women. While there was no fixed division of

longer exists in its original form, it is known

labor in Ainu society, de facto sexual division of

from oral tradition and scholarly literature.

labor existed due to gender and physical

The breakdown of the traditional
structure of Ainu society began at the end of

abilities. One's status as an adult was determined
by one's ability to perform important tasks.

the eighteenth century as the political and
military influence of the Wajin (Japanese) from

Men's Work

Honshu was bolstered by commercial ex¬

Men's primary work included the preparation

change. This structure was completely

and execution of religious ceremonies, as well

destroyed with the birth of the modern

as hunting, fishing, and the production of

Japanese nation during the Meiji Restoration,

tools (fig. 32.2). Inaw, the sacred shaved sticks

which began in 1868. At this time Japanese

used in ceremonies, were made by scraping

leaders regarded Hokkaido as a land without a

shoots of willow, dogwood, and amur cork.

master and took possession for the emperor,

The size and shape of inaw varied depending

disregarding its indigenous population and

on the kind of ceremony for which they were

their livelihood. Even the areas where Ainu

made, but for all purposes, inaw had to be

people were living were proclaimed "official

made skillfully and beautifully. Men also made

land," making it impossible for Ainu to carry

the prayer stick known as ikupasuy, which was

on their traditional economy.

used when offering prayers and sake to the

Hunting, fishing, food gathering, and
small-scale agriculture provided the necessities

gods. Ikupasuy were carved with elaborate
sculptural forms that represent some of the

32.1

234

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M.

KEIRA AND T. KEIRA

32.1

February: Hunting in the

Mountains

Winter was the season for hunting
in the mountains. Often groups of

finest carving traditions of the Ainu (see

harm, objects were carved with sculptural

Maraini, this volume).

forms to keep "demons" from entering them.

While there is no doubt that women

People believed that the more beautiful

prayed, men had the main responsibility for

and powerful the carvings, the stronger the

ing expeditions, but individuals also

praying and sending messages to the gods

defense against the evil gods. For this reason

ventured out alone. This copy of a

during ceremonies. Reciting prayers in the old

men worked hard to improve their carving

panel from Byozan Hirasawa’s Ainu

Ainu style was a difficult task: a young boy

ability, creating ever more beautiful designs

had to memorize the prayers by listening to

using only their makiri (a man's basic utility

his father and grandfather at every ceremony

knife,- figs. 32.4-32.6).

Ainu men would cooperate on hunt¬

Manners and Customs shows a
hunter preparing a fire while his
dogs romp and others hunt deer in
the distance. (HMH)

32.2

Quiver and Arrows

until he had mastered them A line of prayer
from Tatsujiro Kuzuno, one of today's oldest

Women's Work

elders, speaks of the relationship between

Ainu women were busy from early spring to late

humans and gods: "People live because of the

autumn gathering food, gardening, making

gods, and because humans exist the gods can

clothes, producing utensils needed for daily life,

arrows. Quivers, of elaborate con¬

be adored and prayed to." This exquisite

bearing children, and caring for their families.

struction and decorated with

statement spells out the basic equality of gods

Cbise-kor-kdtkemat—the woman of the house—

cherry-bark wrappings, were as dis¬

and man and reveals man's awe of the gods,

had little rest, and as the seasons changed her

who possess immense power, even as it

hands were always busy processing new materials

expresses pride in being human.

into products needed in the household.

Deer and bear hunting were done
principally with bow and poisoned

tinctive as one's clothing style and
identified a man with a particular
regional group. An ikupasuy (prayer
stick) was often bound to the out¬
side of the quiver. (FMC 88075)

"Hunting" meant bear hunting in general,
but deer hunting was also an important sub¬
sistence activity

As soon as the spring thaw began,
women went into the fields and mountains to
pick wild plants that they had not been able

(fig. 32.3). Smaller

to harvest for the previous six months. At

animals such as fox,

least thirty mountain plants were used, plus

raccoon dog, and

an assortment of lowland plant and seaweed

rabbit were targets

species. Those that were edible were con¬

as well Devices

sumed fresh or were preserved for later use,

made by men to

and medicinals were also collected. Because

catch small animals

salt was a scarce commodity (except in

and birds included

coastal areas), most plants were instead

•-M

bows and arrows,

preserved by drying. Dried vegetables were

spring bows, spears,

used in cooking during the winter when the

and heavy hunting

forests and fields were covered with snow.

knives.
Men also had

32.3

Spring also was a time for collecting,
peeling, and processing bark used to make

to know how to

clothing and other materials. While women

build several types

assisted in this process, this work was normally

of boats for use in

done by men. Two types of trees were used:

the ocean, lakes, or

the inner bark of the elm tree was made into

Hunting Group with Dog

rivers, and fishing gear had to be prepared for

obyo thread, while linden produced nipes. The

This painting by Rinzo Mamiya from

specific types of fish and for different condi¬

general method was to scrape off the hard

tions, such as narrow, fast-current streams

outer bark while still in the mountains and

or wide, slow-moving rivers. A particular

bring the soft inner bark back to the village for

and arrow, and a hunting dog. The child

implement known as marek (a fishing spear

processing. Bundles of inner bark would be
sunk into a marsh or a hot spring and left there

32.3

illustrations of Northern Ezo (1855),
shows a group of Sakhalin Ainu
equipped for a hunt with spears, bow

appears to be wearing a fur garment;

with a special pivotting hook) was used by

the middle figure wears sealskin boots

the Ainu. Tools and traps for capturing

for several weeks. When the bark was in a

and a fishskin robe; and the man at

salmon, a major part of the Ainu diet, were

condition that permitted it to be scraped by

right, who is carrying his quiver with a
burden strap, wears an embroidered

attush (bark-cloth) robe. (HML)

found in a great many varieties. As with other

hand, it would be removed from the water,

peoples around the North Pacific, the Ainu

rinsed in river water, and the sticky surface

used a special wooden club to kill salmon.

would be peeled off. When the bundle of fiber

The Ainu version, called isapakikni, carried

was dry, it could be stripped into fine threads

carved inaw-kike (sacred wood shavings) on its

and worked into cloth using a backstrap loom.

shaft and was considered sacred.

Thin threads of bark could also be braided into

Because the Ainu believed that the gods

a strong line for making bags and weaving

were found in every object, each tool had a

mats. Bark fiber was an indispensable material

spirit. In order to protect these spirits from

used to produce clothing, bags, and carrying

32 / WORK AND GENDER ROLES

235

32.4, 32.5, 32.6 Men's Knives
Men’s carving knives (makiri), worn
suspended prominently from the belt,
were highly visible statements of one's
carving prowess. This group displays
some of the variety and elegance of
this important implement. In addition
to a blade and sheath, the knives usu¬
ally had a netsuke-like toggle and a
glass bead attached to the thong that
fastened the knife to the belt. These
toggles offered a unique format for
such miniature sculptures as a knife,
an animal jaw with incisors, and an
awl. (MPM N17340A; AMS 62228;
NMNH 325243)

implements,- to build and equip houses,- and in
many other aspects of daily life. A third type of
clothing material (rdarpe), very light and almost
white in color, was made from the fibers of the
32.5

nettle plant and was most popular among the
Sakhalin Ainu.
Spring was also the time to tap sugarmaple trees (fig. 32.8). Like the peoples native
to the eastern woodlands of North America, the
Ainu used the tree sap to sweeten their diet.
Women also gathered and processed an
important food material called turep in early
summer when the roots of this large-leafed lily
were full of starch (fig. 32.9). When the
leaves began to wither, the plant would be
dug up and the stalk could be eaten steamed
or boiled. Starch from the remaining root was
extracted by cleaning, rinsing, and pounding
the roots in a mortar with a pestle. When the
crushed roots became sticky they would be
placed in a tub of water,- after one or two days
the fiber would float free and the starch would
remain on the bottom. Fiber was skimmed off
and the water in the tub would be changed
repeatedly, leaving high-quality starch that
could then be used for medicine or food.
The fiber that was removed was wrapped
in a woven mat and placed in the shade for
about a week until it fermented. It was then
shaped into a fibery doughnut-shaped disk
called turep akam about one inch (three centime¬
ters) thick and eight inches (twenty centimeters)
in diameter. This important food could be easily
stored by running a line through the holes and

236

TRADITIONAL CULTURE: / M.

KEIRA AND T. KEIRA

32.7 Pillow Box

Ainu called boxes in general suop.
Most boxes had special purposes,
such as storage of beads, neck¬
laces, ceremonial items, or monks¬
hood roots used to make hunting
poison. A man’s workbox {pon suop)
was used to store his knives and
tools and was kept near his place at
the hearth. Often boxes doubled as a
pillows and had ornamental raised
panels at each end. (BMA 12.674 A,B)

children, and old people. Later, during the
autumn, grains, roots, and beans were har¬
vested, and nuts and mushrooms were gath¬
ered and preserved for the coming winter.
Women also had to begin securing materials
needed for various winter manufacturing
tasks, which included the making of mats
(toma) which were used to keep the house

warm, clean, and comfortable, and flower
mats (cbitarpe) used for decoration and cer¬
emonies,- materials for both were gathered in
the fall. Cattails, rushes, and sedge that grew
along the shores were cut, dried, and pre¬
served. Women had to secure large amounts
of these plants during a very brief time period
after the leaves had matured but before they
dried and withered.
Cattails, the best material for mats, were
32.8 Gathering Maple Syrup

hanging them up in a dry place. To be eaten, the

prepared along the shore by cutting the plant

Hokkaido maples were tapped in

dried disk was placed in a mortar and pounded

stems free from the root. The leaves were sepa¬

until it separated into powder and fiber fractions.

rated, overlapped, and rinsed with water, then

The powder was collected and mixed with water

bundled and tied by their leaf ends so that the

spring using troughs and pails, and
the sap was collected and boiled with
meat and fish to make sweet soups
and stews. This illustration is from

and formed into a small ball to be mixed into

bottoms would spread like a fan and diy. They

the late-nineteenth-century picture

porridge. Because the processing of turep took a

were then left in the shade for two or three

scroll Ainu Manners and Customs by

lot of water, it was done at the river. Elders re¬

Hokuyo Nishikawa. (HML)

weeks, always watched carefully to prevent

member women of the kotan gathered together

mold from growing. This work is called kinacha.

working cheerfully at this common task, one of

Autumn was the traditional time for local

the most important of the summer season.

and regional ceremonies that would take place

Communal Work and Celebration

where people shared their thankfulness for

The elders used to say, "When the cuckoo

the harvest of the land with their gods, ances¬

sings, it's time for planting." The work on

tors, and neighbors. In addition to the impor¬

in the various kotan. These are the ceremonies

small garden plots was begun in spring and

tant role that men played in these ceremonies,

continued throughout the summer by women,

women also participated by making sake to

32/WORK AND GENDER ROLES

237

32.9

32.10

32.9, 32.10 Wild Harvest

be used for offerings and preparing traditional

Ainu obtained much of their produce from

foods. After the men had finished praying

nature. Wild lily roots, dug up in the spring

in memorial services to the gods, the women

with wooden hoes and digging sticks,

performed songs and dances.

were boiled and converted to starch for
dumplings. In winter, waternuts were

With the arrival of late fall, the men

gathered through holes in pond ice.

would begin to fish for the salmon that began

These illustrations, which show details

to swim up the streams. Women joined in the

of Ainu tools, dress, and daily activities,

work, processing and drying the fish, a major

are from the late-nineteenth-century

staple during the winter months. When snow

picture scroll, Ainu Manners and Customs
by Hokuyo Nishikawa. (HML)

began to fall the women cut nettles, silver

32.13 April: Twisting Thread

woody vine. Thread was produced from fibers

After elm bark had been stripped from

extracted from the nettle skin and made into

grass, and bay punkar {Celastrus orbiculatus), a

the trees, it was processed into fiber.

fabric and embroidery thread. Silver grass was

This illustration in Byozan Hirasawa’s

used as material for reed screens. The strong

Ainu Manners and Customs, painted

transparent fibers were also braided to make

after 1872, shows a fireside scene
with game and produce hanging from

bowstrings as well as the secret narrow sash

the rafters, a man smoking a pipe, a

women wore as a symbol of chastity or, if

woman tending the fire, and a woman

married, of faithfulness to their husbands,

twisting fiber into thread. (HMH)

whose design was handed down from mother
to daughter. Finally, with all the materials
gathered and processed, the women's summer
work came to a close.
By the time snow began to accumulate,
the men had begun their fall hunting and
women's production work was in full swing.
They began by making thread (kaeka) by
twisting two fine strands of elm or linden bark
into a single strand between the thumb and
forefinger (fig. 32.13). Although not a diffi¬
cult technique, close attention must be paid
in order to keep the thickness of the thread
even. More than two hundred feet (about 65
meters) of thread are needed for a regular-size
32.13

mat, 518 feet (190 meters) to make a saranip
(woven bag), and 902 feet (280 meters) to
make a tar (backpack strap), so women could
not afford to waste a single minute.
Mats for the floor or walls, which do not
have any patterns, are made from cattails with

238

TRADITIONAL CULTURE: / M.

KEIRA

A N D T.

KEIRA

32.12

32.11

thread from twisted linden or elm used as the
warp. Using looms, women wove mats, paying
dose attention to the evenness of the threads.

container for preserving food. Women make

The size of the flower mats used for ceremo¬

saranip in various sizes and styles for different

nies and decorations varies according to use,-

purposes, and various methods are used from

they are woven with the same techniques
used for other mats, and the patterns are

woven product was the tar, which was used to

elm and linden A black color is

carry bundled wood or grass. The sash-type

the walnut tree and red from
the boiled bark of the alder

Making Rice Cakes

region to region Individuals also develop their
own personalized styles. Another important

created using the dyed inner bark of

obtained from the boiled bark of

32.11, 32.12

The saranip, still made today, is an indis¬
pensable article that is used especially as a

straps were, on average, about thirteen feet
(four meters) long and three inches (seven
centimeters) wide, and the central headstrap

tree. With these colors,

portion was often decorated with black-and-

beautiful geometric

white designs. The strap was used in the same

patterns of contrasting

manner as the Native American carrying strap,

black and red against

or tumpline, with the wider central part of the

a white background

strap worn over the forehead and its two ends

are produced.

extending over the shoulders and tied around

A ubiquitous implement was the large

the load This important implement was carried

mortar and pestle, which was carved

by men and women nearly all the time. When

from logs. It is shown here being used

not in use it was folded and hung from one's

by two women in an old postcard cap¬

belt or tucked into a waistband.

tioned, “Young Women’s Rice-Cake

Most of the products produced by women

Making. Aborigine's Custom Hok¬
kaido.” When making special rice

were decorated with embroidered designs, and

cakes to be used in iyomante ceremo¬

embroidery continues to be widely practiced by

nies, rice flour was mixed with other

the Ainu today. Although styles have gone

ingredients and formed into cakes, as

through many changes, they continue to evolve.

shown in a late-nineteenth-century

Ainu-e titled “Masticating Offertory

The patterns used on ceremonial clothing, while

Rice Cakes" from Ainu Manners and

refined, serve a definite purpose, for Ainu

Customs by Hokuyo Nishikawa. (NAA

believe that the patterns protect the wearer from

98-10408; HML)

32.14

malevolent forces, help repel sickness and
disease, and guard against evil spirits. In old

Garden Hoe

Gardening was an important but

times Ainu women embroidered these designs

supplementary activity for most Hok¬

on the clothing of their loved ones to keep them

kaido Ainu families. Originally the only

safe from danger when they were out hunting in

hoes available were simple ones made

the mountains or at sea. One can imagine the

from the branch of a hardwood tree,

long nights of winter passing slowly as the

like the hoe shown here. As iron be¬

women's work progressed

came more available, iron shoes re¬
placed wooden blades, giving them a
much longer life. (NMNH 150682)

32/ WORK AND GENDER ROLES

239

W
Ainu
Sociality
Emiko Ohnuki-Tierney

HEN DISCUSSING HUMAN

between 1965 and 1973. While the present

relationships and their

tense is used for ethnographic descriptions,

workings among the Ainu,

some of the beliefs and practices described

the term "sociality" is more

have changed or been discontinued.

accurate than the older standard anthropo¬

At the outset, two common misconcep¬

logical term "social organization," which fails

tions about the Ainu people must be pointed

to emphasize the interplay between individu¬

out. First, the Ainu have never been a

als and their social group (fig. 33.1). Rather

monolithic group. In addition to intragroup

than discussing abstract principles of social

variations, the Ainu of Hokkaido, Sakhalin,

organization, this essay will describe the day-

and the Kuriles were distinct social groups

to-day behavior of Ainu individuals (figs. 33.2,

who inhabited three different ecological

33.3)—including the bear-sending ceremony

zones. The Hokkaido Ainu formed perma¬

(iyomante), shamanistic practice, and other

nent settlements in areas abundant in natural

activities—as more illustrative of the concept

resources, and some of their settlements were

of sociality. Although this discussion refers to

quite large and their political organizations

other Ainu groups, my ethnography depends

well developed and more formal. The

more on the Ainu of the northwest coast of

Sakhalin Amu, on the other hand, moved

southern Sakhalin rather than the Hokkaido

seasonally between their summer and winter

Ainu. My fieldwork among the Sakhalin Ainu

settlements and had less formalized political

took place after they moved to Hokkaido at

organization. The Kurile Ainu, with smaller

the end of World War II, in several periods

and more mobile settlement patterns, were
the hardest-hit victims of the Russian and
Japanese fur traders,- the last of the Kurile
Ainu died in 1941 (Ohnuki-Tierney 1974).
Variations among these three groups are also
due to the fact that each had been in contact
with different outside cultures who influenced
and were influenced by each group of Ainu in
quite different ways.
The second misconception involves
representations that the Ainu were bypassed
by history,- on the contrary, they have never
been isolated but rather were successful, wideranging traders. What is rarely recognized is
that their culture developed in dynamic ways
owing to their interactions with others, and
these historical dynamics profoundly affected
the development of Ainu culture in general,these influences even affected religious prac¬
tices and beliefs, which are often assumed,
erroneously, to lie at the core of any culture
and thus be shielded from outside influences.
Needless to say, interaction also resulted in
the devastating impact of Russian and Japa¬
nese colonialism (Takakura 1943, 1960).

Iyomante—
The Bear-Sending Ceremony
Of all the rituals of the Ainu, the bear-sending
ceremony is by far the most elaborate (figs.
33.4, 33.5). This is the only ceremony shared
by all Ainu in all regions (except the northern
Kuriles), although it had much regional
variation. The ceremony involves not only
the members of the immediate settlement
33.1

240

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / E. OHNUKI-TIERNEY

but those from other communities as well,

as reassurance of their goodwill toward hu¬

thus contributing to regional communica¬

mans. The iyomante is the most important

tion. It provides a significant opportunity

form of gift exchange, and it occurs at a cos¬

for male elders to display their wealth, sym¬

mic scale—between humans and deities. It is

bolizing personal and community political

noteworthy that the cycle is initiated by the

power to those from other settlements

deities, who first sacrifice themselves for

(Pilsudski 1915).

humans by offering their meat and fur. It is the

Items that connote wealth—especially

deities who establish the model for generosity,

such trade goods as Japanese lacquerware,

which is the human value most treasured by

swords, beads, and other materials acquired

the Ainu, as we will see later.

through the Santan trade—were considered

33.2

The entire process of the bear cere¬

the most respectful offerings to the deities.

mony normally takes at least two years and

The Santan trade (Takakura 1939) was a very

consists of three stages. Hunters first capture

active trade network that stretched from

a bear cub, either while still in its den or

Korea and Osaka (Japan), along the Sea of

shortly after emerging. It is usually raised by

Japan coasts of Honshu, Hokkaido, and

the Ainu for about a year and a half, and at

Sakhalin, throughout the lower Amur region,

times women nurse these newborn animals.

and all the way to Manchuria, involving

Although the time of the ceremony differs

many peoples. The objects are not items of

according to region, it is most often held in

wealth per se but are Ainu expressions of

the beginning of the cold season, for the

respect toward the deities. Thus, the bear-

Sakhalin Ainu, it takes place just before they

33.2

33.3

sending ceremony, iyonmnte, which is often

move from their summer settlements into the

considered to be quintessentially "Ainu," does

interior for the winter.

Greeting Demonstration

Jesse Tarbox Beals photographed
Sangyea and Sangtukno demonstrating
a greeting ceremony outside the Ainu
house at the St. Louis Exposition in
1904. (NAA 93-10385)

33.3

Greeting Ritual

Ainu custom called for a simple
greeting ritual when people met, as
shown in this illustration from a
version of Shimanojo Murakami’s

Curious Sights of Ezo Island (1799).
These and other rituals were among
the vivid memories of early visitors to
the Ainu. (NMNH 392,023-25)

not represent a "closed" culture and society

In the major ceremony, the bear is

because it was predicated upon Ainu involve¬

ritually killed and its soul is sent back to the

ment in trade,- at the same time it is also an

mountains. The ceremony is multidimen¬

expression of a unique religious practice.

sional: it is religious, political, social, eco¬

From the perspective of the Ainu, the
33.1

Festival Scene

bear-sending ceremony is a "ritual of rebirth"

nomic, and even joyful, with the merriment of
eating, drinking, music, and dancing. But for

This hanging silk scroll, collected by

for the bear. This is an important point that is

the Ainu, for whom even the disposal of food

Edward S. Morse and inscribed

often misunderstood by outsiders. The cere¬

waste is ritually controlled, religion is never

"Autumn, 1871,” was painted by
Byozan Hirasawa (1822-76). The
painting shows a large group of Ainu

mony's purpose is to send off the soul of the

isolated from life in general. All participants

bear in a ritually proper way so that it will be

don their finest clothing and adornments for

reborn in the mountains where the bear deities

the iyomante. Prayers are offered to Fuchi, the

exuberant social setting with an elder

(kimun-kamuy) reside. If humans treat the bear,

fire goddess and the deity of the hearth and

(ekashi) singing and playing the tonkori.

which is affectionately referred to as "deity-

home, but the major focus of the ceremony is

grandchild," with love and respect and send its

on the deity of the mountains who has sent

soul back with gifts and offerings to the bear

the bear as a gift to humans.

people enjoying themselves in an

One feels the warmth of the family
atmosphere through details of facial
expression, and all the clothes and
hairstyles of people of different ages

deities, then the bearkumuy will be pleased and

are carefully illustrated. (PEM 3279)

will revisit the Ainu with gifts of meat and fur

33/AINU

SOCIAL LIFE

Among the Sakhalin Ainu, after the bear
is taken out of the bear house it is killed with

241

two pointed arrows (fig. 33.4), whereas the

Shamanism

Hokkaido Ainu use blunt arrows (beper-ay)

In contrast to the leading role played by men

before critically wounding the bear with

in the bear festival, Ainu women play an

pointed arrows,- they then strangle the bear

important—though not exclusive—role in

between two logs. Male elders skin and dress

shamanism. In Sakhalin Ainu oral tradition,

the bear, which is then placed in front of the

shamans in the past were also powerful politi¬

altar (nusa) where treasures are hung (fig. 33.5).

cal leaders who had supernatural ability to

After preliminary feasting outside at the altar,

communicate with deities (Kindaichi 1914;

the Ainu bring the dissected bear into the

Ohnuki-Tierney 1969); their religious power

house through the sacred window and con¬

may have been even more important than

tinue their feast. Among the Hokkaido Ainu,

their physical ability in combat. Shamanism

the ceremony ends when the skull of the bear

among the Sakhalin Ainu differs considerably

is placed on the nusa outside the house on a

from that of the Hokkaido Ainu. Among

pole decorated with maw; the elder recites a

the former, cultural valuation of shamanism

farewell prayer while shooting an arrow to¬

is high, and well-regarded members of the

ward the eastern sky, an act that signifies the

community, both men and women, can be¬

departure of the deity. The Sakhalin Ainu take

come shamans.

the bear skull, dressed in ritual wood shavings,

rites for divinations of various sorts and

sacred pile in the mountains. They also sacri¬

for miracle performances, most rites are

fice two carefully chosen dogs, which are

performed for the diagnosis and curing of

33.5

33.4

33.4, 33.5

Although shamans sometimes perform

and the bones, eyes, and penis (if a male) to a

Sakhalin Ainu Iyomahte

Bronislaw Pilsudski spent several years
studying the Sakhalin Ainu in the early

considered to be servant-messengers to the

illnesses. These include particularly grave

bear deities. (For the Hokkaido Ainu bear

illnesses whose etiological cause—"Why did

ceremony, see Munro's film and Kitagawa

it befall this particular individual?"—must be

1900s, and he later sold copies of his
photographs to the Smithsonian,
including pictures of the Sakhalin bear
ceremony. The ceremony concludes a
multiyear cycle: a bear is reared from
cub to adulthood and is then killed so

[1961 ],- for Sakhalin, see Pilsudski [1915] and

sought from the spirits and deities. When a

Ohnuki-Tierney [1974: 90—97]).

shaman is possessed by a spirit, she/he enters

Although often mistaken as cruel by

a state of trance and the spirit speaks through

outsiders, the bear ceremony is a ritual

the shaman's mouth, providing the client

whereby the Ainu express their utmost

with necessary information such as the diag¬

that its spirit can be sent back to the

respect to their deity, and its paramount

nosis and cure of an illness or the location of

from its human hosts. (NMNH 87-

significance is a sacred act. For the Sakhalin

a sought-after missing object.

5540, 81-3596)

Auni, the bear is not important as a food

god world with presents and praise

Less is known of shamanism among the

source: like other hunting societies that do

Hokkaido Ainu. Here shamans are usually

not regularly eat their most prestigious big

women, although male shamans are known to

game—the iKung San of the Kalahari Desert,

have existed in the past. The Hokkaido Ainu

for instance, do not regularly eat giraffe—

shaman also enters a possession trance, but she

Ainu rarely eat bear meat, and the bear

does so only if a male elder induces it in her

ceremony is held only once a year, if that.

by offering prayers to the deities. Her function

Even so, Ainu men and women find bear meat

is confined to diagnosis of illness, after which

exquisite, unparalleled by any other food.

male elders take over the healing process. Male

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /E. OHNUKI TIERNEY

33.6

assistant produces an aromatic smoke by
burning Ezo spruce or larch, a plant called
nuhcha, and minced dried leek. Throughout

the rite the shaman frequently drinks a
solution—considered too salty for ordinary
human consumption—consisting of seawater
(or river water during winter), Ezo spruce,
nuhcha, and dried kelp coated with sea salt.

Shamans do not wear special garments except
for a headdress, a headband to which various
charms are attached, a necklace, and two inaiv
(for Ainu shamanism see M. Chiri 1973c,Ohnuki-Tierney 1976a, 1976b, 1981).
From a symbolic perspective, several
aspects of shamanism reveal the importance

33.7

elders must, however, consult a shaman before

of the female principle in Ainu culture: the

Ainu social code included provisions

they make important decisions for the commu¬

rite is held in the woman's domain, inside the

for corporal punishment. Councils of

nity, such as a declaration of a war.

house, and most importantly, beside the

33.6, 33.7

Corporal Punishment

elders considered the offense and
prescribed the punishment. For

The shamanistic ritual is held at night,

hearth where Fuchi, the female counterpart of

serious crimes, the offender was

for Ainu consider the daytime to be the time

the bear deity, resides. It is here that women

beaten with a grooved wooden club

for humans and night the time for deities and

prepare the daily meals, converting natural

that sometimes carried a carving of a

demons. The ritual is held inside a house, at

resources into culturally edible food,- for Ainu

animal, in this case, a snake. This
image from Illustrations of Ezo

Livelihood by Shimanojo Murakami
dates to the early nineteenth century.
(UPM A470B; NMNH 392,024)

the hearth, which the Ainu consider to be a

this is accomplished by thorough cooking, as

miniature universe and the abode of Fuchi,

distinct from their neighbors, the Nivkhi

"Grandmother FJearth" and the most powerful

(formerly known as Gilyaks, a people of

female deity in the Ainu pantheon. She

northern Sakhalin and the lower Amur delta

becomes the mediator between humans and

region) and the Japanese, whose diet often

other deities whose knowledge and power are

includes raw food.

being sought.
Among the Sakhalin Ainu, the ritual

In other words, shamanism is expressive
of the act of cooking, the conversion of raw

begins with drumming by the shaman,-

natural products into culturally acceptable

drumming announces the beginning of the

food, and it also involves healing, the way

ritual, expels evil spirits, and helps the

humans prevent a person from returning

shaman reach a state of trance. The shaman's

to nature through death. In this sense, it

33/AINU SOCIAL LIFE

243

The social hierarchy of Ainu women
and men is further complicated by age, which
is another important factor in determining the
rank of individuals within society. The Ainu
believe that the aged, both men and women,
are closer to the deities than the young,
and they alone have the privilege of using a
special language of the aged, onne-itak. Only
male elders, who are the officiants of the
bear-sending ceremony, can recite the most
sacred oral tradition, which is narrated in
the language of the deities, called kamuy-itak
(fig. 33.9). It is the older women who become
official caretakers of the bear cubs.
The importance of age among the Ainu,
33.8

has the same symbolic purpose as the bear

whose economy is based upon hunting and

ceremony—the use of deities and nature

gathering, means that the cultural valuation

for human spiritual and physical nourishment.

of individuals and the resultant social hierar¬

However, while the role of women is expressed

chy are not based on a utilitarian criterion.

tobacco and making smoking kits and

privately as an individual act in shamanism, the

For example, elders who are no longer the

paraphernalia. Women did not usually

bear ceremony expresses the role of men in the

major food providers are assigned more power

participate in the production of

political structure, in their public role.

Tobacco Pouch

As in other cultures, smoking was one
of the most enjoyable forms of male
and female social activity, and great
amounts of time went into acquiring

smoking equipment, but this pouch,

than the young. Ainu notions of men/women
and the aged/young transcend the biological

collected in Sakhalin, was probably

Social Hierarchies and Gender

made by women and may have been

givens of contemporary Western society.

imported. Bleached sealskin pouches

Among the Ainu, women are generally

with dyed skin and colored embroidery

assigned a lower social status than men. This

were common among mainland Amur

status is given a clear cultural explanation:

played out not only in ceremonial situations

women are considered to be a defiling

but in everyday life. Above all, it is expressed

River peoples. (FMC 32075)

* *.-(

33.9

The intricate hierarchy between men
and women and the aged and the young is

presence because of the smell of menstrual

in the seating arrangement around the hearth.

K

and parturient blood, which in Ainu belief

The most important direction in the Ainu

does not disappear after washing. This is

universe is that facing the mountains,- this is

ffl
\

why women retreat (in Sakhalin custom) to

east for the Ainu of western Sakhalin, with

Praying with Inaw

their houses when the bear is being killed

north being next in importance. Among the

during the iyomante. Despite this, extraor¬

Sakhalin Ainu, the sacred window through

dinary power is assigned to female blood.

which the slain bear is brought into the

When an epidemic, such as smallpox, threat¬

house during the bear-sending ceremony is

ens a settlement, male elders recite a sacred

built into the wall facing the mountain side,

epic to ward off disease, believed to be spread

usually north. The master of the house and

by demons However, if their recitation fails

his wife sit on the north side, and male elders

and victims begin to sicken, the only antidote

who are guests sit on the mountain side.

considered effective is women's menstrual

Young males sit on the south side, whereas

blood, which is applied to the afflicted spots

young women sit on the west side, the lowest

of the sick person's body. In this case, young

in the hierarchy of directions.

Inaw, usually made of willow sticks

women hold powers complementary to that

shaved into different shapes and forms

of older men. Similarly, the belief in the power

(depending on the ceremony or use)

of menstrual and parturient blood led to a

that govern social categories and hierarchy.

practice whereby hunters always carry part

As hunters of land and sea mammals, young

helped carry human prayers to the
gods. Each inaw was carved in a form

These cultural institutions express com¬
plex complementarity among the principles

of a woman's undergarment—such as under¬

men bring meat that not only sustains the

intended. Men, who had responsibility

clothing from his mother or sister—close to

body but enriches humans through the spiri¬

for communicating with the gods, had

him because of the power of the blood to

tual power embodied in meat and fish, the

recognizable to the god for which it was

to learn to carve inaw correctly, with
precision and beauty, as well as how to
pray in the appropriate language and
with the prescribed rituals. This scene

protect him from deities and demons. These

flesh of deities or the products of deities.

biological factors define the female body

Young women, on the other hand, gather

only during its reproductive years,- therefore

plants and engage in daily cooking and in

"uncontaminated" women past menstruation

healing, other tasks important for sustaining

Through Ezo, painted by Gentan Tani in

gain considerable power and collectively have

human life. The aged, both men and women,

1799. (HML)

higher status than young men.

are revered for their knowledge of religious

244

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/ E. O H N LI K I TIERNEY

comes from Drawings of Travels

matters, including shamanism,- their wisdom is

ceremony is at once an expression of mutual

Ainu pipes (kiserii) were decorated with

the most precious reservoir of human knowl¬

generosity—the sharing of the bear meat by

beautiful and intricate carvings on

edge about the deities that govern the Ainu

all—and an expression of social hierarchy

universe.

demonstrated by the order in which the meat

33.10

Pipe with Carved Decoration

portions of their stems. Sometimes,
as here, the carvings covered the
entire length of the stem and served

In cases where political organization was

was partaken, with male elders eating first.

as a public advertisement of a man’s

more developed, as with the Hokkaido Ainu,

artistic skill. Pipe carving was one of

the bear ceremony and its political signifi¬

The Ainu principle of conflict resolution

the most challenging carving tasks a

cance came to overshadow shamanism.

also indicates the primacy placed upon the

Shamanism then became culturally devalued

sociality of individuals, i.e., individuals who

and was relegated to women, a common

are members of a social group. Here again

phenomenon in many parts of the world.

shamanism offers a supreme example: One

Among the Hokkaido Ainu, men cannot start

category of illness that shamans use in their

the healing process without a woman shaman's

diagnoses is called aymawko abun (penetration

diagnosis,- the male political leader cannot

by the spirit of an arrow). The symptom of

man could undertake. (PMC 86052)

But no society is without conflicts.

declare a war or make other important deci¬

this illness is a patient's experience of a sudden

sions without a woman shaman's ritual per¬

sharp pain, localized, for example, in the

formance for prognosis and diagnosis,- and

stomach, chest, or side of the torso, like an

at times aged women even held more power

arrow wound. This may happen if someone

than aged men, as in the case of an older

utters words of hostility toward another, but

Sakhalin Ainu woman who overturned the

the victim is often neither the instigator nor

verdict of accidental homicide that had been

the one verbally attacked, there may be no

agreed upon by a body of male elders.
Contrary to some Marxist scholars'

particular relationship, kinship or otherwise,
between the offender and the victim. The idea

romanticized image of the egalitarian society

is that if a person verbally assaults another,

of hunter-gathers, principles of hierarchy

someone in the community will suffer from

and social division prevail among the Ainu as

this illness. Therefore, when someone gets

in any other population. These principles,

angry and utters harsh words against another,

however, are fluid and complementary rather

people in the community reprimand the

than being inflexible rules upholding a linear

offender. It is the collective responsibility of

model in which those above enjoy exclusive

the members of the community to uphold this

power over those below. Therefore, among

code of ethic,- social disharmony is not simply

the Ainu the relationship between men and

a matter of one individual against another but

women is one of complementarity rather than

affects everyone (Ohnuki-Tierney 1981: 66).

antagonism or power inequality (the latter

Generosity is a moral value that links an

being enormously important components of

individual to his/her society. It is expressive

the contemporary Western sense of "gender").

of the way in which Ainu society works, not

The basis of the Ainu notion of sociality

by rigid principles but through the combina¬

Pipes, like men's prayer sticks

is the emphasis on a person's generosity as the

tion of principles of social organization with

(ikupasuy), could take almost limitless

paramount moral value. Its practice starts with

individual achievements and qualities.

33.11

Pipe with Burl Bowl

shapes and forms, so men were free

Ainu deities who offer their own bodies and

Generosity is the most important human

flesh to humans for the sustainment of life.

value among the Ainu, and complementarity

to express their personalities, artistic
natures, and carving skills. The carver
of this pipe took a highly unconven¬

Political leaders are chosen on the basis of

is the cardinal principle of Ainu sociality.

tional approach. (UPM 56.8.9)

generosity—a person who is willing to share,

These are not abstract notions,- they are

3 3/ AINU SOCIAL LIFE

2 45

T

he play or- Ainu children was
fun, as play is supposed to be,
but their play was closely related
to everyday life. The Ainu were

Ainu
Children's
Play

hunter-gatherers, and so the children imitated
hunting, fishing, sewing, and cooking in their
play activities and thus acquired necessary
life skills through recreation. By mimicking
religious ceremonies, they learned about faith
in the gods and how to relate themselves to

Miyuki Muraki

nature and the gods. Through their play, Ainu
children gradually learned their future roles as
men and women (fig. 34.1).

34.1

pull each other while hopping on their free

Boys played a game on the beach that
trained them to catch swordfish, as
well as to hunt such large marine
mammals as sea lions and seals. A long
string was attached to a bundle of dry
grass or reeds that represented swordfish
(sirikap), and one of the boys tied the string
around his waist. The boy with the string
pulled the sirikap while others pursued the

legs. The one whose leg became detached
from this chain of legs or who fell would lose.
Other sporting activities included pole-vault¬
ing and high-jumping, much like the trackand-field events played in the Olympic Games.
These were good exercises to help boys master
the use of a mountain staff, a valuable tool
when hunting in rough terrain, needed to go
down cliffs and jump streams. A rope-skip¬

swordfish with sticks resembling harpoons (kite)

ping game (fig. 34.5b, c), in which a boy

until one eventually struck the bundled grass

skipped forward and then back or touched the

with the "harpoon.'1

ground with his hands after each skip, likewise

Another similar game that entailed
throwing a wooden spear at a ring tossed in

built the strong bodies needed for hunting on
steep mountainsides. Other games included

the air was played by two teams—one to toss

hide-and-seek, tag, cup and ball, and cat's

and the other to try to throw the spear

cradle. Seasonal fun included sledding, snowball

through the ring (fig. 34.5a). The team that

fights, and swimming in rivers and the ocean.

missed the ring would lose one member to the
opposing group, and if they succeeded they

Girls learned the roles of wife and
mother through play, by imitating homemak¬

gained a player from the opposing side. The

ing and sewing tasks. In one such activity,

team that had to give away all its players lost.

called ayusinukar, a girl drew patterns unique

This game trained boys to hunt and develop

to the Ainu, such as the morew (whorl) crest, in

the hand-eye coordination needed to pursue

the beach sand or in the hearth ash (fig. 34.6).

moving targets.

Ainu patterns are not only physically attrac¬

Boys' play included playing with arrows

tive they are also thought to have the power

(kue sinot) or ope sinot, a similar game played

to protect those who wear them from evil.

with the sharpened root of a forked tree. Kue

The form of these designs varied from region

sinot involved shooting play arrows with a

to region, and they were passed from mothers

play bow (fig. 34.2) at hoops rolled by a

to daughters for generations, evolving over

playmate along the ground or at shells hung
from a tree branch. In ope sinot, one boy threw
a sharpened tree root so that it stuck in the
earth, and his opponent threw a similar stick
34.3

trying to knock the standing stick down. These
games enhanced boys' agility and helped them
master the use of spears and bows.
In another activity called acikiri terke,
similar to "three-legged
races" played by
American children,
several boys would cross
one of their legs with the
eg of another and then would
34.4

246

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

M. MURAKI

circled the bear while clapping, singing,
and dancing with bamboo leaves in their
hands. Through such activities both boys
and girls learned their roles in social groups
to prepare them to participate later in
actual ceremonies. To take their proper role
in Ainu society it was imperative that they
understood how to relate themselves to
nature and the gods.
There were also language-related games
such as "fast talk” and "riddle play," which
helped develop speaking skills. Children also
enjoyed learning to play the flute and
mastering the mukkuri (a mouth harp). These
instalments do not use the Western scale —
"do, re, mi . . ."—but they produce sounds
and rhythms unique to the Ainu, and these
instruments continue to be played today.
The games described here are only
34.6

part of the wide range of activities enjoyed
34.1 Girls Playing Cat’s Cradle

time. When a mother made clothes, girls would

by Ainu children. Most recreational activi¬

This photograph, taken by Bronislaw

sit next to her imitating her sewing movements.

ties and competitive sports had an impor¬

A young woman was expected to create her own

tant role in cultivating the abilities and

patterns by repeatedly drawing and erasing the

skills necessary to become a responsible

Pilsudski ca. 1903-05, shows Sakhalin
Ainu girls playing string games. Scientific
curiosity about the Ainu physical type
and questions about racial mixing

pattern. Other girls' play included picking wild

adult. As the traditional Ainu hunting-and-

prompted him to note that the girl on the

vegetables, gathering nuts, and cooking.

gathering way of life changed, however,

left was the daughter of a Russian man
and an Ainu woman. (NAA S8-10370)

Play that taught children spiritual
aspects of Ainu culture included the imitation

some aspects of children's play lost its
meaning. Today many rules and original

of the bear-sending ceremony (iyomante). In

forms of games have become obscure, and

“Galloping Clams" and Other Toys

this game children made a small bear by

it is now nearly impossible to pass on the

Among the many toys and games

putting coal on a sallow flower,- they then

old traditions of play to future generations.

34.2, 34.3, 34.4

made for Ainu children were miniatures
of men’s hunting weapons and tools
like bows and knives; women’s imple¬
ments like mortars and scoops; and
games like hoops and “galloping
dams.” The latter were used by boys
and girls, who slipped the shells
between their first and second toes
and, while keeping tension on the line,
galloped about the house like a horse.
(UPM A479, 516; BMA 12.177,
12.159, 12.201, 12.438a,b)

34.5 a-d

Games

Some of the many games played by Ainu
children were illustrated in Ainu-e draw¬
ings, including ring toss (a), bar jumping

34.5a

(b), skipping rope (c), and pole vaulting

is f (lyy

(d). The first three images were drawn by

i-

an unknown artist in Ainu Manners and

5

5
f
v

Customs', the latter derives from Draw¬
ings of Travels Through Ezo (1799) by

i

Gentan Tani. (HML)

34.6

Teaching. Sewing Skills

Mothers teach their daughters to make
thread, use the backstrap loom, and
learn Ainu clothing patterns by tracing
them in the sand in this Ainu-e. (AMS)

34.5d
34 /

CHILDREN’S PLAY

247

B

efore defining aspects of spirit-

SpiritSending
Ceremonies
Shiceki Akino

elder, followed by other men, goes to the bear

sending ceremonies, 1 offer a chrono¬

cage (beper-set), where they offer prayers, take

logical description of the iyomante, the

kimun-kamuy, god of the mountains (the bear

most prominent of such rituals, as it was

god), out of the cage and parade him around

enacted at the Shiraoi Ainu Museum in 1994.

the open space to let him exercise and play

Preparation begins about two weeks

(fig. 35.2). After this, several men shoot blunt

before the event with firewood being collected

ceremonial arrows (heper-ay, fig. 35.8) toward

and men making sacred shaved sticks (inaw,

kimun-kamuy and then strangle him between

fig. 35.15), prayer sticks (ikupasuy, figs. 35.1,

two logs (fig. 35.6). While he is "sleeping," the

35.9), and bundles of mugwort or bamboo

bear is skinned and the head is severed to

grass (takusa) to burn for purification,- at the

separate the spirit from the body. The skin is

same time, women begin preparing rice wine

then folded neatly and the spirit of the bear

and food offerings. As the time approaches,

whose head has been enshrined on top of the

messengers travel to neighboring villages to

folded skin is invited into the room through

invite people to the festival.

the god's window (kamuy-puyar) located in

The day before the ceremony, guests

the east wall of the house. In the evening, the

bearing gifts begin gathering at the designated

feast begins (figs. 35.7, 35.1 2). In front of

house (cbise), where many fine articles are

kimun-kamuy, food and rice wine are offered,

already on display. The iyomante officially

and people dance and sing until midnight.

begins when the local elder offers a prayer to

On the second day of the ceremony,

Fuchi, the goddess of the fire and hearth. The

men decorate the head of kimun-kamuy with

35.2

inaw-kike (sacred wood shavings). This is the
last and best form in which it is displayed to
the participants before its journey to the god
world. In the evening, a final feast is held.
As before, food and rice wine are consumed
with the bear, and people dance and sing.
At the conclusion of the evening ancient Amu
yukar (tales of heroes) are recounted by an old
woman, to which those present listen intently,
holding their breath in anticipation of the final
climax. The storytelling is abruptly terminated
just as the final episode begins in order to
encourage the kimun-kamuy to return next year
to hear the end of the story. The guests offer
their final farewells to kimun-kamuy, enshrined
*S»5K<

on a wooden seat (yuksapaoni) and its head is
mounted (fig. 35.1 I), facing east, on the altar

35.1

248

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

S. AKINO

35.1

Kamuy-nomi: Praying to the Gods

Despite repressive official policies,
Ainu continued to observe traditional
religious practices throughout the dif¬
ficult period of the mid-twentieth cen¬
tury. This photograph was taken by
American anthropologist Ted Banks III

(misa) located outside of the sacred window

Having certain obligations, the gods

(figs. 35.10, 35.14). When all arrangements are

disguise themselves when they visit the

concluded, kimun-kamuy returns to the god

human world. For example, mountain gods

world aided by ceremonial arrows that people

(kimun-kamuy) disguise themselves as bears,

shoot off to guide it.

and when they visit the human world they

Early the next morning, after the kimun-

bestow their fur and meat upon humans as

in the 1950s or early 1960s, probably

kamuy has left on its journey, the festival is

gifts. The Ainu respectfully welcome gods

in Nibutani. (MKB, courtesy of

concluded by changing the direction of the

who visit the human world as honored

yuksapaoni toward the west and holding a

guests. Welcomed gods—which in the case

shinnurappa, a memorial service for the ancestors.

of animals means those that are shot and

Edmund Carpenter)

35.2

Exercising the Bear

As the bear cubs being raised for the

The Ainu believe that gods exist and

killed—are sent back to the god world with a

iyomante grew larger, their care and

that they are similar in appearance to people

simple ceremony held at the location where

feeding became more difficult to man¬

and lead their lives in a similar fashion. They

they were killed or at the hunting hut. Bear

age. Twenty men using heavy lines

believe that above the human world (Ainu

hunting is conducted from January to March,

mosir) there is a world where gods live (kamuy

when the bears are hibernating and after

ing that the time of iyomante was at

mosir), but gods also have a role in the human

their cubs have been born. If baby cubs are

hand. (NAA 83-16285)

world. While gods are in the human world,

found, they are taken to the village because

they disguise themselves as virtually anything,

the Ainu believe that the parent bears, as

were needed to supervise the exercise
of this nearly full-grown bear, indicat¬

including such natural objects and phenom¬

parent gods, have entrusted them to bring up

ena as the sun, moon, wind, or fire,- animals

their cubs (fig. 35.4). Generally cubs are

such as bears, foxes, raccoon dogs, rabbits,

raised in the village for a year or two.

fish owls, or jays,■ and such man-made objects

When the time comes, the iyomante—

as boats, pots, and straw mats. Animal spirits

a ceremony to return the spirit of the grown

have the closest relationship with and are

cub to the god world where its parent

most important to human beings, and the

resided—is carried out in the form of a

Ainu treat these spirits—especially bears and

ceremonial feast (figs. 35.6, 35.7). At this

fish owls, which are their two highest-ranking

occasion the bear god (kimun-kamuy) is sent

gods—with great respect. Instead of keeping

home with many gifts. Upon his return, this

these spirits in the human world after they

kimun-kamuy then invites other gods to his

have been caught or "used up” (as in the case

house for a party at which such human gifts

of spent or broken man-made objects), the

as sake (tonoto), dried salmon (.satchep), and

Ainu return them to the spirit world with

sacred shaved sticks (inaw) are shared

elaborate "sending" ceremonies. Of these, the

together with stories about how respectfully

bear-sending ceremony (iyomante) best repre¬

the god was treated. These gifts are meant to

sents Ainu religious beliefs. Sending ceremo¬

convince the other gods to visit the Ainu

nies are also held to return the spirits of

world in the future to receive more benefits

plants, inanimate objects, and spent tools or

from them and in turn provide the Ainu with

artifacts, to the spirit world.

gifts of their own: their flesh and hides, claws,

-3 5 / SPIRIT-SENDING CEREMONIES

249

35.3, 35.4, 35.5

Care and Feeding

As an honored guest, a bear was given
loving care by its hosts, who treated it as
a member of the family. As a cub it was
brought into the house, fed like a human

teeth, and other products. Likewise, the gods

ing back the spirit of a semidomesticated

gain prestige and rank in their world if they

bear, similar ceremonies are used in Hokkaido

return from the human world with many gifts.
For human beings, the number of gods

to send back the spirits of other animals. This
essay, which is based on published records,

infant, and given toys (heper-iutam) like

who visit equals the number of animals taken

describes these ceremonies and their regional

the chewing bar pictured here (fig. 35.3).

during the hunting season, so their regular

variations. The iyomante demonstrates this

Later, caution required feeding the bear

visits ensure the Ainu a plentiful food supply.

variation even within different regions of

in its cage with troughlike “spoons”

It is said that gods achieve ever higher rank in

Fdokkaido, where linguistic and cultural varia¬

the god world by their repeated visits to

tion is seen in a welter of different terminolo¬

as an “infant," eating from a lacquer

earth, gaining more wealth and prestige and

gies and practices (Sato 1961,-Aoyagi 1984).

bowl; another image (fig. 35.5), by

therefore being of more assistance to humans

Here, in addition to kamuy-opunire (the term

Shimanojo Murakami, shows a later

as their power and rank advances,- this belief

for the bear ceremony held in the mountains)

stage in the process with Ainu dancing

is reflected in the Ainu saying, "A true god

and iyomante (the term for village ceremonies

is very useful to human beings." In this way

for cubs and domesticated bears), both used

(heper-nima). An Ainu-e by Hokuyo
Nishikawa (fig. 35.4) shows the bear

around the bear cage at the beginning
of the iyomante ceremony. (UPM
A531C, A442; HML)

the iyomante becomes the forum representing

in Kushiro and Nayoro, we find in Yagumo

the symbiotic relationship among animals,

terms like yomande for the village rite and

humans, and the spirit world and provides a

peurep yomande for the mountain rite. Other

mechanism for influencing earthly events: it

terms like okanomi (oka, catching,- nomi, pray)

signifies and validates the relationship

are used in Asahikawa, apparently to desig¬

between humans and gods.

nate rites for bears killed in the mountains,-

While the iyomante usually refers to send¬

35.4

250

35.5

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

S. AK1NO

this usage is disputed, however, because this

35-8

35.8

Flower Arrows

Early in the bear-sending
ceremony the bear is
taken out of its cage and
the host shoots at it with
“flower arrows" (heper-ay)
that have blunt tips. The
arrows, which in some ar¬
eas were decorated with

inaw-kike (wood shavings),
are meant to excite the
bear's spirit to prepare it
for its journey home.
Flower arrows also are
used later in the iyomante
when they are shot off
into the sky to guide the
bear’s return to kamuy

mosir. (MPM N17284c,
N17285e, N17100a,
N17200e, N17285C)

35.6

term encompasses the sending of gifts, which

are used in addition to opunire, and there are

After the bear (,kimun-kamuy) is

can only be done at village ceremonies.

subtle differences in their meanings and

killed, it is skinned and given the

Unfortunately, because the bear ceremony

linguistic forms.

35.6, 35.7

Iyomante

place of honor at a feast where it is
entertained with gifts, speeches, and

was discontinued in most areas during much

story-telling. Two versions of the cer¬

of the twentieth century, regional variations

emony—a modern bear-sending cer¬

will remain difficult to decipher.

emony conducted at the Ainu Mu¬
seum at Shiraoi and a bear-sending

Even Ainu informants and oral histori¬
ans from the same geographic locations
reveal differences in their use of the words

opunire and iyomante. For instance, in concept
Opunire

opunire is (1) a ceremony for a variety of

Although many of the same animal spirits are

animals, while iyomante is a ceremony spe¬

hundred years of iyomante tradition.

sent back in another type of ceremony called

cifically for sending back the spirit of a bear,-

(AMS; HML)

opunire, the form of these ceremonies is dif¬

(2) a ceremony for all animals including fully

ferent. A broader definition of opunire con¬

grown bears, while iyomante is a ceremony

notes the place where the ceremony takes

only for domesticated bears,- (3) a ceremony

place: at the spot where animals were killed

for sending back the spirits of all other

in the mountains,- at an altar built alongside

animals raised by people except for bears,

a cavern or hunting hut,- or in the village after

for instance, for fish owls and foxes, etc.,-

ceremony painted by Shimanojo
Murakami in 1799—document two

bringing animals back from the mountains.

(4) a ceremony for sending back the spirits

Depending on the geographic origin of the

of higher-ranked animals such as bears,

speaker, the words hopunire, hopuni, or opunika

raccoon dogs, and foxes. In terms of form,

35 / SPIRIT-SENDING CEREMONIES

2 51

given elaborate sending ceremonies. In
Kushiro and Obihiro, Ainu people believe
that raccoon dogs are uncles of bears, and
when they are captured alive they are taken
back to the village to be raised and sent back
to the god world in ceremonies similar to
those for bears,- Hidaka and Saru Ainu have
similar beliefs, believing moyuk to be servants
of bears. Asahikawa people see raccoon dogs
as ranking second behind bears, and skull¬
sending (sapa-opuni) ceremonies are held after
several skulls are collected. In general, a
ceremony for raccoon dogs is similar to that
for bears because they are considered uncles,
aunts, or servants of bears, and thus are the
gods ranking closest to them.
The sending ceremonies for foxes
(cbiromup) in Kushiro, where baby foxes were
raised by people, is similar to that for bears
(fig. 35.1 3). Obihiro people put up inaw for
foxes killed in the mountains, and when the
head of a fox was cut off at home, an inaw was
also put up. In Asahikawa, only white foxes
(upas cbironnup) with long fangs were sent back
because they had the highest rank among
foxes. The skull was wrapped in a straw mat
with woven patterns (chitarpe) and enshrined
within the house as a charm, but it was never
placed on the altar (nusa). Fox-sending cere¬
monies were mostly practiced in northeastern
Hokkaido and are not known for southwest¬
ern Hokkaido.
Fox spirits are a matter of dispute among
different Ainu groups, with some believing
them to be helpful spirits while others see
them as evil. Nevertheless, their skulls were
35.9

Ikupasuy

opunire is (1) a ceremony held on the spot

often used as guardian spirits for fishing,

Prayers offered to the bear with

where animals are killed, for instance at an

hunting, and daily life, and they were also

ikupasuy and sake honor its spirit

altar built on the side of a bear's den or hunt¬

used for fortune-telling. Whether it was

and bestow gifts for it to take back

ing hut, and it may be held either by hunters

believed that the spirits remained in skulls

on the spot or by people from the village who

used for this purpose is ambiguous: theoreti¬

kike, indicating that it was used in the

have gathered there for a feast,- (2) a ceremony

cally, if they had been through a sending

iyomante ceremony. Those on the

held in the village after taking animals from the

ceremony, they should have lost their active

right have carvings of a bear head

mountains,- or (3) a ceremony held in the

power,- to be a guardian deity, its spirit must

mountains to send back things (inaw or animal

exist. Ethnography has not yet provided

remains) that were worshipped in the house.

answers to such questions.

to kamuy mosir. The ikupasuy second
from the left is decorated with inaw-

and what appears to be a ritual sword
with an itokpa mark on its bevelled
end. These decorative motifs are simi¬

The long-eared or fish owl, identified

In many traditional societies the treat¬

garments. (BMA 12.332, 12.307,

as the god of the village (kotan-kor-kamuy), is

ment and spiritual station of dogs often re¬

12.316, 12.325)

the highest-ranked god in various places in

flect their unusual place as a domestic animal

lar to those found on Ainu carvings and

252

Hokkaido, and its sending ceremony is similar

that straddles both the human and natural

to that for bears (figs. 35.15, 35.16). In areas of

worlds,- Ainu dog-sending ceremonies also

southern Hokkaido like Shiraoi where few owls

contain these ambiguous elements. In

are found, bears are the highest-ranked god

Shizuuchi the ceremony for dead dogs is

and ceremonies for fish owls are rarely seen.

called iwakte, elsewhere this term refers to

Raccoon dogs (nioyitk) are treated as

sending ceremonies for inanimate objects

high-ranking gods in various areas and are

(see Utagawa, this volume),- white dogs in

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / S. AKINO

particular are treated with great respect as
descendants of the gods of great wolves. In
Hidaka and Saru dead dogs are deified by
placing two willow inaw beside them at a
high place within sight of the river. Unlike
bears and foxes, their heads are not cut off
and their pelts are not skinned. After the
ceremony, the remains are placed in a box
together with offerings of rice, tobacco, and
dried fish, and a hole allows the spirit of the
deceased to pass through. The remains are
left in a bush with their heads pointing
toward the river. In Kitami and Bihoro,
special ceremonies are held for dogs killed
by poisoned arrows released by tripping a
spring-bow trap (amappo). These dog-sending
ceremonies are similar to the ceremonies
performed for objects whose useful life has
been spent In Sakhalin dog spirits are sent
back when a person is seriously sick or when
a new house is built. Similar rites involving
the sacrifice and display of dogs are prac¬
ticed by the Koryak and other peoples of
northeastern Siberia to drive away pestilence
and disease. The concept behind these
practices reaches beyond tbe normal sending
ceremonies of dead animals and carries the
connotation of other religious beliefs, in¬
cluding propitiation, sorceiy, and even a
nuance of human sacrifice.
In Obihiro animals such as sparrows or
35.12

squirrels are not left where they are killed,
rather, people make inaw for them, and

rabbits are cooked and eaten, and their skulls

ceremonies are held for pheasants and jays.

are put neatly on a table on a pedestal. When

Inaw-kike are wrapped around their necks,

they start to pile up, the collected heads

the tip of a small inaw is notched and attached

are turned into an altar, and prayers for gods

to the cranium, and they are taken to the

are held in spring and fall."

nusa. Even small animals are treated respect¬

Deer and salmon are the primary Ainu

fully and are given simple sending ceremonies.

food sources, and salmon is especially

35.10, 35.11, 35.12

One historical record for the Tokachi and

valuable as evidenced by its names: si-ipe (real

Nusa and Benkai’s Bear Skull

Honbetsu area reads: "Heads of mice and

food) and kamuy-cbep (fish of gods). Despite

At the end of the iyomante the bear's

the dietary importance of these

head is placed on the nusa, a fencelike

animals, deer-sending ceremonies

altar located outside the god’s window

are found only in a few areas, and

at the end of the house. The skull,

although several rites are associated

dressed in specially prepared ritual
shavings and mounted on a forked

with salmon runs (see Watanabe,

stick, then joins similar relics from

this volume), they do not conform

earlier ceremonies. This skull was

to the format of sending ceremonies

sold by an Ainu named Benkai in

for other species. Salmon are

Motomuroran to Hiram Hiller who

celebrated in a first-salmon cer¬

theorized that because Benkai had
given up his Ainu beliefs and become

emony each autumn when they

Japanized, he was willing to sell it

begin to swim upstream.

(fig. 21.8). A modern nusa from

Although recent ethnography

Shiraoi, decorated in a colorful woven

reveals little about the deer-sending

mat, is also seen here along with an

ritual, skulls of male deer are

Ainu-e showing a ceremony at a nusa.

illustrated enshrined in nusa in old

(UPM A494; AMS)
35.11

35 / SPIRIT-SENDING CEREMONIES

253

paintings such as Ezo God Festival dating to the

individual animals, but there are times when

Edo period, indicating that such rituals were

several different animals are sent back at one

apparently held in the past. After the begin¬

time In these situations, the sending order is

ning of the Meiji period in the late 1800s,

decided by the role and rank of each animal,-

records report ceremonies for deer (yuk-

most of those ceremonies accompany a bear

kamuy) in such locations as Tokachi, Ashoro,

ceremony. Some examples reveal interesting

Shiraoi, Kitami, and Bihoro. For example,

information about human and animal-world

according to FJisakazu Fujimura:

relationships. For instance, in Nayoro, when

Deer (yuk) were sent back in a ceremony

ceremonies are performed for both a bear and

held by an old man named Kijima [his

a raccoon dog, the bear is sent back first. In

Ainu name was Ekashiparo] who moved

Bihoro, when a ceremony is conducted for a

from Chitose in about Taisho 12 [1923],

domesticated fish owl and a domesticated

After holding a sending ceremony for

bear, the bear is treated first. Also in Bihoro,

Japanese deer that had been butchered in
the mountains, the skins, crania, and meat
were taken back to the village. The deer
skins were folded just like those of bears,

Fox Sending

Among some Ainu groups, the fox is a
high-ranked god and is given an elaborate
sending ceremony like that for the bear.
This photograph showing a fox-sending
ceremony was taken by Bronislaw
Pilsudski, ca. 1903-05, when he lived
with the Sakhalin Ainu. (NAA 98-10366)

35.14

Nusa

As testimony to a celebratory past,
many bear skulls rest on the sacred
altar or nusa in this photograph.
(Courtesy of AMS)

female is treated first. In Ashoro, when

prayer for the god was performed by

sending back the spirits of a bear and a fox,

adding inaw. The left sides of the crania

the ceremony for the fox is held first, and a

were broken to extract cerebrospinal fluid

fox is treated before a raccoon dog, and a

with inaw-kike. A formal sending ceremony

raccoon dog before a bear. Finally, in Ashoro,

when ceremonies are held for a bear and a

was held when the crania were inserted

fox, the fox is treated first because the fox's

into a prepared forked kibada tree and an

role is to carry baggage for the bear and, as

altar was set up (Fujimura 1977).
In general, the Ainu believe that deer

in the West, foxes are believed to have a
cunning character,- therefore, the fox should

and salmon do not come down to the human

be sent back before the bear so that it will

world as gods themselves but are sent by a

not run off with the bear's gifts.

god who controls deer (yuk-atte-kamuy) and a
god who controls salmon (chep-atte-kamuy):

IWAKTE

perhaps it is due to this spiritual belief that

Like iyomante, iwakte means sending spirits

sending ceremonies are not held for these

back, but in this case the ceremony refers

animals. In practical terms, sending ceremonies

to broken, old, spent, or no-longer-necessary

are not held for animals that can be caught

tools of daily use,- depending on the geo¬

constantly and in large quantity, like fish

graphical region, small animals may be

Sending ceremonies are usually held for

254

first, because a male bear will get angry if the

and the crania were placed on top. Then a

and the crania were decorated beautifully

35.13

in the case of ceremonies for male and female
bears, the ceremony for the male bear is held

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

S. AKINO

included in this category. For example, in

Kushiro an iwakte ceremony is held even when
such small animals as squirrels (niow), rabbits
(isopo), or little birds (poncbikap) are caught
(Sato 1961). Natori (1984) also discussed the
distinction: "lyomante is used for important
gods, but iwakte is used for gods of other
hunted animals. Iwakte has a casual meaning,
to celebrate and send, and the ceremony itself
is also simple." Like iyomante, the opunire and
iwakte sending ceremonies have various
aspects and regional differences.
The Ainu, like other hunting-andgathering cultures whose food resources until
recently were largely dependent on the forces
of nature, have been accustomed to a constant
search for sustenance. To ensure a steady
supply of food and other life-sustaining
products, they deify everything necessary for
life, including animals, plants, and natural and
man-made objects, and they believe that gods
and people exist in a mutually reinforcing,
symbiotic relationship. The Ainu also believe
that catching animals by hunting them is

35.15, 35.16

largely a passive act, because gods, of their

Inaw for the Great Owl

own accord, bring food to the human world

The owl, guardian of the village, is also

by pretending to be animals. Therefore,

given special attention by some Ainu

when the Ainu send spirits back to the god

groups. In 1903-05 Pilsudski photo¬
graphed a nusa dedicated to the owl

world, the gods will return the favor by

in Sakhalin. The importance of this

constantly replenishing the human world

animal can also be seen in an owl¬

with their spiritual and material resources.

sending ritual illustrated by Hokuyo

The iyomante and associated sending ceremo¬

Nishikawa in his late-nineteenth-cen-

nies provide public validation of the recipro¬

tury picture scroll Ainu Manners and

cal values by which people rationalize their

Customs. (NAA 47401; HML)

world and existence through practical action,
shared belief, and ritual acts.

35 / SPIRIT-SENDING CEREMONIES

255

J

YOMANTE REFERS TO AlNU CEREMONIES

The
Archaeology of
Iyomante
Hiroshi Utagawa

grass stalks or mats,- ritual offerings, including

spiritual essence of things—to the

animal bones decorated with wood shavings

heavens. In the Ainu language, the

(kike) and tufted prayer sticks (maw), were

ritual was called "i-yomante," meaning "thing/
send" or "thing/let go," or simply "sending

Among hunting peoples throughout the
world, the worship of an animal's spiritual

understood in a narrower sense as the sending

essence was common. The guardian spirits of

back of bear spirits. This essay explores the

animals, forests, brush lands, and oceans were

history of the spirit-sending ritual as a specific

also worshipped, and these practices consti¬

expression of Ainu culture in the archaeologi¬

tuted a fundamental aspect of animistic belief

cal record. The perspective taken is that of

or religion. Ainu who lived in coastal regions,

paleoethnology, in which religious behavior

where the sites of their ancestors could still

and ritual performed by Ainu predecessors are

be seen as pithouses and "kitchen" midden

gleaned from the silent remains of archaeo¬

refuse, thought the remains of mollusks, fish,

logical evidence.

and animal bones were left over from ancient

According to Ainu belief, everything

sending ceremonies. Hiromichi Kono
explained their nature as follows:

heavens, and when they appear in the human

Ainu believe shell mounds contained the

world they are disguised (hayokpe) as various

cadaveral remains of ancient nusa where

things or animals. For example, the god of the

spirits that had been ushered into the

36.1

36.2
Iyomante: The Bear-

Sending Ceremony

The iyomante is thought by some schol¬
ars to be the central core that gives
meaning and identity to Ainu culture and
society. Here an iyomante is illustrated

mountains, kimun-kamuy, cloaks himself as an

heavens were deposited. Therefore, shell

Asian brown bear (fig. 36.1),- the god of the

mounds are viewed and treated fundamen¬

deep ocean, repun-kamuy, dresses himself as a

tally differently from the trash heaps of

killer whale or as a dolphin,- and the god of
the village, kotan-kor-kamuy, clothes himself as

in detail in a scroll painting by Byozan

a fish owl. The belief that disguised kamuy

Hirasawa dating to the nineteenth cen¬

supplied food and furs to people is reflected

tury. Dancing, storytelling, feasting, and

in the careful management of resources that

many other activities conducted during
the celebration are shown, in addition to
fine detailing of Ainu material culture
and clothing design. (NMNH 392,025)

the Ainu still practice today. In order not to
displease the gods, the Ainu did not waste
food remains or leave bones about after a
meal but rather sent leftovers back to the

36.2

attached to this altar (fig. 36.3)

back spirits" (H. Kono 1935). It is usually

has a spirit, or kamuy. The spirits live in the

36.1

the house and consisted of a short wall of

of sending back spirits—that is, the

Nusa at Yurap Village

This photograph in the Kurile Ainu village

spirit world with respect and with a variety of
gifts and ritual observances. The site where

modern civilization. [As a sign of respect to
the gods] it was strictly prohibited to
desecrate ancient shell mounds with
common modern garbage (1935).
The Eastern Kushiro shell mound in
Kushiro, which dates to the early Jomon period,
is a typical example of such a site. The excava¬
tion of five porpoise skulls (Phocoena phocoena
Linne) arranged in a face-to-face circular pattern
could hardly be other than archaeological
evidence of an ancient sending ceremony.

of Yurap, taken by Romyn Hitchcock in
1888, shows Ainu gathered around a

nusa. (NAA 87-5538)

256

the Ainu performed these rituals is called the
nusa, the "sending-back" place, and is an Ainu

Sending Ceremonies

form of altar (fig. 36.2). In the traditional

There are three types of sending ceremonies

Ainu village the nusa was typically located

known in Ainu society: those for animals,

outside the "god's window" (kamuy-puyar) of

plants, and tools. The animal-sending cer-

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

H. UTAGAWA

general is called opunire, and the ceremony
for hunted (as opposed to reared) bears
belongs to this type. When bears killed in
the forest were brought back to the village,
the ceremony that took place was called
kamuy-opunire in the Kushiro region. It seems
likely that in its earliest form the opunire
ceremony honored animal spirits in general,
but over time separate rituals evolved for
different species.
Sending ceremonies were also practiced
for some plants, for instance, rice bran,
millet, and barnyard grass. In an illustration
in Shimamojo Murakami's Ezo seikei zusetsu
(Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood, 1799) such a
ceremony is captioned as mur-kuta-usbi-kamuy,
the ceremony is accompanied by maw
representing gods "inhabiting the place
where rice bran is stored." Sometimes plants
were honored in the same sending ceremo¬
nies as tools and utensils.
Tool-sending ceremonies (fig. 36.4)
focused on everyday implements as well
as festival objects: both unused and old
damaged tools could be sent in a ceremony
known as iwakte, meaning "sending back with
blessings" or "having them return." Evidence
of iwakte rituals have been observed fre¬
quently in archaeological deposits. Because
36.3

Dancing before the Nusa

such sites contain the remains of used and

Byozan Hirasawa used dancing before
the nusa at the end of the iyomante

broken tools, which in Ainu belief would be

ceremony as the feature for the Novem¬

given sending ceremonies when discarded,

ber panel from his Ainu Manners and

they offer important insights into "Ainu"

Customs. The archaeological remains

beliefs in prehistory. Unfortunately, from a

from such activities would be seen as

practical, scientific point of view, in most

a concentration of animal skulls. (HMH)

cases the physical archaeological remains of
emony itself has two types: one is the

iwakte ritual are limited to ashes, stains, and

iyomante, most commonly known today as the

patches of burned soil, which are common in

bear-sending ceremony,- the other involved

ancient sites generally, making specific

sending ceremonies for foxes, raccoon dogs,

interpretation as iwakte difficult.

wolves, deer, whales, and fish owls. Two
different ceremonies honored bears, one for

Dates for Archaeological Nusa

bears captured by hunting and another for

Because most archaeological objects can be

bears killed after being reared as cubs in the

dated precisely by their type or style, the age

village. Rituals for the cub-rearing ceremonies

of nusa deposits can be determined by

are only known in the lower Amur River

materials that are found, for instance, clay

basin, including Sakhalin and Hokkaido, and

and iron pots with inside lugs. At the

in regions inhabited by such groups as the

Raitokoro Kawaguchi site in Tokoro, ritually

Nanai, Ul'chi, Negidal, Orok, Nivhki, and

deposited fish bones were discovered near

Ul'ta. Ainu groups in Sakhalin and Hokkaido

the top layer of Pithouse 1 1 and interior-lug

(but not in the Kuriles) often referred to

pottery vessels and bone harpoon heads were

iyomante only in the sense of the cub-rearing

found together in what appears to have been

rituals, but iyomante also referred to sending

the location of an iwakte ritual dated to the

ceremonies for fish owls, which were the

fifteenth century. Iron pots with interior lugs

guardian spirits of communities (kotan).

were introduced later from Honshu, replac¬

The sending ceremony for animals in

36/ARCHAEOLOGY OF IYOMANTE

ing the indigenous clay pots, between the

257

sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In the

relationships between archaeological remains

seventeenth centuiy, hanging-grip iron pots

and ash levels.

became popular. Use of these changing styles
for dating is sometimes complicated by the

Forms of Nusa

persistence of technological traits for long

Characteristic types of nusa locations are

periods. For instance, some features of

classified into five groups, the first being the

eighteenth-century harpoons (kite) are already

"soil-conscious" form, found in the ground.

observed at Satsumon sites from the eighth to

The remains of pithouse villages in Hokkaido

the thirteenth centuries. The detailed history

(fig. 36.5) can still he observed if they have

Ainu held a simple spirit-sending cer¬

of these tool forms, as well as pipes and coins

not been disturbed by buildings or agriculture,-

emony (iwakte) when discarding their

of the Kan'ei period, provides a means of

later generations believed these depressions

used and broken tools. The spirits of

dating later nusa deposits to the latter half of

were ancient sacred sites and used them for

these implements could then return to

the seventeenth century.

their own nusa rituals. The upper level of

36.4

Sending Ceremony

for Broken Tools

the other world with gifts of sake and
praise from humans about the kindness
and respect they had received on earth.

Archaeological sites can also be dated
by volcanic ash levels that can be assigned to

Pithouse 1 1 at the Raitokoro Kawaguchi site,
mentioned previously, is typical of this type.

This in turn convinced the tool gods to

eruptions of known dates. Examples include

In some cases, people built a low rectangular

return to earth again someday, bringing

Komagadake C2 ash dating to A.D. 1694,-

mound and placed bear skulls inside.

life to new tools and useful objects. This

Ainu-e from Shimanojo Murakami's

komagadake D ash dating to 1640,- Usu B2

The second type is the "stone-conscious”

ash from 1663,- Usu C2 ash from 161 1,-

form, characterized by an intentional arrange¬

Tarumae A ash of 1739,- and Tarumae B ash of

ment or placement of rocks or by use of areas

and cracked ceramic vessels from an

1667. In these cases, dates of mtsa deposits

near rocks and outcrops. At the Tobinitai site

iwakte ceremony. (HML)

can be determined by comparing the physical

in Rausu, stones were piled at the upper part

early-nineteenth-century Illustrations of

Ezo Livelihood shows a broken iron pot

36.4

258

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

H. UTACAWA

1870 and

36.7 Bear Ceremonialism

Excavations at Shibecha in the 1970s

1939 (Utagawa

uncovered a probable nusa site at the

1989). Many hares

base of a tree containing the remains

(Lepus timidus) and foxes

of two hundred to three hundred

(Vulpes iwipes) were sent

bears, deposited there after iyomante

from this site as well.

ceremonies held between 1870 and
1939. Bear ceremonialism like that

Archaeologically, the fact that

practiced by the historic Ainu can be
traced back to Okhotsk, Satsumon,

few fish owls have been found sent
back in ancient sites is noteworthy,

and Jomon cultures in Japan and the
Russian Far East. Bear ceremonialism,

because Ainu often performed rituals for

identified by ritual placement of bear

this animal, the god of the village. Everyday

bones and production of bear carv¬

tools and ceremonial instruments were also

ings, is a common theme in circumpo¬

sent back.

lar cultures. This ikupasuy has a carv¬

The fifth type is a form that did not have

ing of a bear poised above a stream

a specific geographic context. For example,

with three salmon; it may have been
used in a first-salmon ceremony.

at the Fushikokotan-chashi site in the city
of Kushiro, a loggerhead turtle (Lepidocbelys

(MPM N17302)

olivacea) was buried with its head pointing

367

36.5 Destroyed House

toward the ocean, suggesting that the turtle,

After someone died, it was customary

like the orca, was considered an atuy-hor-kamuy,

for their house to be destroyed. This

god of the ocean, by early Ainu.

pithouse, photographed by Romyn

The first and third forms of nusa rituals

Flitchcock in the Kurile Islands, was

have been found amongst the Sakhalin and

36.5

36.6

destroyed after its owner had drowned

of houses where iron pots and a pipe bowl of

Kurile Ainu, and similarities with Hokkaido

at sea. Such destruction often left the

pumice stone were found together with sea

have been noted. At the site Ropatoka-1 on

mammal and fish bones.

the Kamchatka Peninsula, the upper layer of

material possessions of the former
owner in well-preserved archaeological

The third type is the "shell-mound"

the shell mound contains shells, bones of sea

form, which also includes so-called bone

mammals, birds, and fish, remains character¬

36.6 Fox-Sending Site

mounds. Excavators of the Tanneushi shell

istic of the third form of such sites,- it also has

Many sending ceremonies took place in

mound in Shari reported three separate areas:

interior-lug ceramics and toggle harpoons,

the woods, away from Ainu dwellings

one for shells and mammal bones, one

suggesting Ainu were present or that its

context. (NAA 10362)

and villages. The use of a tree or a
stump for a fox-sending ritual, seen in
this photograph by B. Pilsudski in Sa¬
khalin, ca. 1903-05, gives meaning to
the "tree-conscious" form of iyomante.
Such sites would be difficult to find
archaeologically, but chance discover¬
ies of animal skulls and broken-tool
deposits, made during modern building

primarily for fish bones, and one for shells.

inhabitants had been influenced by Ainu in

These mounds may have been the locus of the

the latter half of the seventeenth century

earliest misu-deposit observances.

(Dikova 1983).

The fourth type is the "tree-conscious"

Toyohiro Nishimoto (1996) has defined

form in which a tree represented the tree spirit

some key conditions for recognizing animal¬

(fig. 36.6). This author conducted a study on

sending ceremonies in archaeological data,

the Shuwan site of Shibecha in 1976 and 1978,

which include the presence of a skull, bones

and construction, may be the remains

which is thought to have been a nusa deposit

representing part of a single species, a methodi¬

of sending ceremonies. (NAA 10367)

situated at the base of a spirit tree where two to

cal arrangement of bones, the accompanying

three hundred bears were sent back between

remains of a building or structure, and evidence

36/ ARCHAEOLOGY OF IYOMANTE

259

of processing, such as burned bones or holes

ten were found to be older than three years.

in the skull. Several of these criteria must be

The fact that only remains of mature bears

present in order to conclude that a sending

were recovered suggests that people at this

ceremony took place,- these conditions are met

site treated cubs in a different way

in the case of both Satsumon and Okhotsk

(Nishimoto and Sato 1991). Evidence of

culture evidence that indicates the presence of

different rites for mature bears and cubs has

opunire-type bear-sending ceremonies.

not yet been found at Satsumon sites. There

Archaeological evidence also permits us

is a report (O. Takahashi 1993) of a bear

to recognize changes in the history of sending

whose cranial bones indicate an age of

ceremonies. In the fifteenth century there

between eleven and fourteen years old bur¬

were more soil-conscious forms that made use

ied in a pit at Bibi Site 8 in Chitose. The

of the upper levels of pithouse sites,- in the

find was from the lower part of the Tarumae

sixteenth century the shell-mound form was

B volcanic ash-level, which establishes the

added to the soil-conscious forms in the

date in the first half of the seventeenth

inventory of nusa deposit sites, and it occurs in

century. This is a significant discovery of a

approximately equal numbers. During the

bear-sending ceremony, even though only

seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the ratio

one bear was found.

of these two types remained the same, and in

Of all these rituals, the epitome of Ainu

the nineteenth century all forms also appeared

culture is the cub type of iyomante. Hitoshi

in more or less equal numbers. In the

Watanabe has argued that this is the defining

twentieth century the tree-conscious form, in

ritual of Ainu culture, for it is his belief that

which sending took place at the base of a god

"the bear ceremonialism complex," including

tree, increases. The number of stone-conscious

the various cultural elements closely tied to

sites, such as Rock Shade cave, is also

the iyomante (fig. 36.7), is at the heart of Ainu

relatively large.

culture (H. Watanabe 1972).

Bear-Sending Ceremonies and
Ainu Culture

ering the Ainu cultural complex from an

This author divides Ainu cultures into two

1989, 1992). Placing sending ceremonies

This idea can be extended by consid¬

historical expressions: the "proto-Ainu

such as the iyomante, opunire, and iwakte at the

culture" of the fourteenth to eighteenth

center of this complex allows one to see

centuries, and the transformed "new Ainu

how Ainu society is structured by relation¬

culture" of the post-nineteenth century

ships between these ceremonies and fami¬

(Utagawa 1989). The transition between

lies, groups, and communities. The sending

the two, which occurred in the nineteenth

ceremonies and rituals represented by the

century, can be seen in their sending cer¬

iyomante are an important mechanism for

emonies. The specific cub-type iyomante is

those with blood relations who hold the

believed to have begun in the eighteenth

identical mark—in Ainu, the shine itokpa —

century even though nusa deposits for ma¬

inherited from their ancestors. These cer¬

ture bears existed in the thirteenth-century

emonies allow the Ainu to maintain their

Satsumon period. At the Otafukuiwa Iwakage

ethnic identity and their sense of belonging

site in Rausu on the Shiretoko Peninsula,

and solidarity in modern society.

thirteen bears were buried side-by-side, and

260

archaeological point of view (Utagawa

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / H. UTAGAWA

S

HAMANISTIC IDEOLOGY IS DEEPLY

Ainu
Shamanism
Kan Wada
edited by Igor Krupnik

sama clearly has the same origin as the

rooted in the foundation of tra¬

Tungus and Orok word sama/saman which

ditional Ainu culture (Ohnuki-

denotes a shaman and, hence, is the root of

Tierney 1973b,- Wada 1996,- Irimoto

the term that is recognized worldwide.

1997). The Ainu share in common with their

Ainu shamanistic beliefs also reveal some

Siberian neighbors—the Tungus, the Ul'ta

of the basic Siberian features. In the course of

(Orok), and the Nivkhi people—several

a shamanistic rite, called tusu, a shaman

distinctive features of their shamanistic

becomes possessed by a spirit or spirits who

practices and beliefs, bor example, the Ainu

usually receive instructions from higher deities

have a basic mythological theme of "wander¬

or ancestors and convey their messages

ing in the other world" in which a shamanlike

through the shaman. Therefore, during a

hero Samaikur traveled to the multilayered

typical shamanistic rite at least four classes of

other world to get back the spirit of the

participants are involved in spiritual interac¬

goddess who was abducted by an evil spirit.

tion: the shaman, his/her personal helping or

The shaman's journey was made by riding a

protective spirits, other spirits who conveyed

baby cradle (sinta), just as Siberian shamans

the message, and the higher deities. Among

use their drums for flight. Like the Siberian

the Sakhalin Ainu, one particular spirit, the

shaman narratives, the Ainu myth followed a

goddess of the hearth, reportedly played a

story of struggle in which the hero fought

special role as the key intermediary between

with many different enemies with the help of

the shaman and various deities (Ohnuki-

his protective spirit(s). The Ainu morpheme

Tierney 1973b: 18).

37.1 Shamanic Seance
Relatively little is known about Ainu
shamanism, especially in Hokkaido,
where it seems to have disappeared
as a formal institution and survives
today primarily in the form of female
healers. Shamans continued to prac¬
tice their trade in Sakhalin into the
early twentieth century, however. This
photograph of a shaman performing
a seance at the hearth of a Sakhalin
Ainu house, taken by Bronislaw
Pilsudski in 1903-05, is the only
photograph of an Ainu seance known
to exist. (NAA 98-10382)

37 / AINU SHAMANISM

261

(nuhcha), which the shaman drank during a
seance, is also documented. Dogs were com¬
monly used for sacrifice before or after the
performance (fig. 37.3). The Sakhalin Ainu
shamanistic seance was a well-organized
community ritual that included several com¬
ponents common to Siberian indigenous
shamanism, such as a gradual falling into a
state of self-oblivion by continuously striking
drums and use of intoxicants, the invitation
of protective spirits, strong dance movements,
spirit gestures and imitation sounds, and
divine revelations.
Like their Siberian counterparts, Sakhalin
Ainu shamans were initiated after having
endured a disease (bubyou) early in life, which
was taken as a sign that the spirits had chosen
that individual as a vessel. The shaman's role
in the Sakhalin Ainu community ranged from
healing to divination to protection of the
community (fig. 37.6). The major function
of the Ainu shaman was, of course, healing,

Types of Ainu Shamanism

37.2 Amulet String
This amulet string (senisteh) has sev¬

through the diagnosis and treatment of ill¬

Ainu shamanistic practices are generally

nesses. In the past, shamans reportedly also

divided into two types, according to the two

conducted rituals to benefit the community

major Ainu historical areas: the Sakhalin type

as a whole such as ceremonies for successful

and the Hokkaido type (Wada 1996: 305).

hunting, good weather, and protection

There may have been an independent third

from dangerous epidemics, such as smallpox

bundle of netting, and a small engraved

version of Ainu shamanism in the Kurile

(fig 37.7). Among the Sakhalin Ainu most of

metal plate. It was found in an aban¬

Islands, but unfortunately there is no precise

the reported shamans were men—according

doned Ainu house in Niitoi (now Novoe),

information about this.

to Pilsudski (1909a), six shamans out of eight

eral charms attached to it, including a
two-headed carved-wood bear, wooden
animal figures (one possibly an otter), a

Sakhalin, around 1945. Although its

Regional variations in culture are highly

he personally encountered in Sakhalin were

specific function is unknown, neighbor¬

developed among the Ainu people, and Ainu

male—which differs from the situation

Amur region and eastern Siberia used

shamanism, in particular, illustrates these

among the Hokkaido shamans but is a similar

similar amulets. (Kan Wada Collection)

profound regional differences. With regard to

ratio to that found among Siberian shamans.

ing indigenous peoples of the lower

Sakhalin Ainu shamanism, we owe much to

The Sakhalin Ainu also had a custom of

the famous Polish ethnographer Bronislaw

making wooden effigies called nipopo (wooden

Pilsudski, whose fieldwork supplied the core

baby), which represented both protective

of our present-day information on Sakhalin

and evil spirits (Wada 1959). These wooden

Ainu folklife and traditions (Pilsudski 1906,

effigies (figs. 37.4, 37.5) may resemble the

1907a, 1909a, 1909b, 1912). According to

general Siberian tradition of the ancestral-

Pilsudski's observations, many Sakhalin Ainu

shaman/shaman-aide images, the oncjons, which

shamanistic practices were typical of general

the Russian ethnographer Dmitri Zelenin

indigenous shamanism patterns elsewhere in

(1936) once associated with the origin of

Siberia. For example, an Ainu shamanistic

shamanistic practices in Siberia and elsewhere.

seance usually took place in a dim hut and was

262

The shamanistic traditions of Hokkaido

conducted by a male shaman in a state

Ainu are very different from those once prac¬

of ecstasy, the so-called shamanistic trance

ticed in Sakhalin. Unfortunately, perhaps

(fig. 37.1). The shaman used an oval drum

because shamanism was not as well developed

called a kaco (most probably, a word borrowed

among the Hokkaido Ainu and their spiritual

from the neighboring Tungus-speaking Orok

culture was more significantly transformed

people), sticks, carved wooden hats, tufts of

under Japanese influence, we have very little

shaved wood (inaw-kike), ceremonial sacred

firsthand evidence of traditional Hokkaido

sticks (inaw), as well as other paraphernalia

Ainu shamanism. Even the best early studies

that typically provided a rattling sound, such

of the Hokkaido Ainu culture discussed sha¬

as metal chains (fig. 37.2). The use of a drink

manism only in passing (e.g., Batchelor 1901,

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

K. WADA

37.3 Ritual Sacrifice of Dogs

1927,- Kindaichi 1925: 288-300,- Munro

Many native groups of Eastern Siberia be¬
lieved that sacrificing and displaying dead

1962: 104) or supplied rather vague details.
37.4

Thus, much of the early ethnographic infor¬

dogs could help avert epidemic disease
and other misfortune. Similar rituals were

mation on Hokkaido shamanism is probably

practiced by the Sakhalin Ainu, who are

lost. For example, there is little direct evi¬

seen here hanging pups. (NAA 98-10368)

dence to confirm the existence of male sha¬
mans in Hokkaido in the past, and more

37.4, 37.5 Nipopo Dolls

recent descriptions usually refer to Amu

Sakhalin Ainu shamans produced abstract

shamans as women. A woman shaman was

wooden figurines called nipopo (“wooden
baby"), used primarily as amulets for cur¬

usually induced into an ecstatic state by a

ing or warding off childhood disease. The

special prayer which was offered by a male

addition of strips of red and blue cloth or

elder,- the reports describe a kind of hypnotic

a blue bead (on the upper figure) was

procedure used by the male elder to aid the

thought to increase their power; such

female shaman, but during several encounters

dolls were dressed in inaw-kike (wood
shavings) to increase their efficacy. The

I had in Hokkaido after World War II, all the

two-headed figure may have been a charm

Ainu female shamans were able to put them¬

to enhance the probability of giving birth

selves into a slightly ecstatic state on their

to twins. (Twins were believed to bring

own. None, however, had any special noise¬

success in fishing and hunting among the

making paraphernalia such as a shaman drum

Sakhalin Ainu and neighboring Eastern
Siberian groups. A similar belief was also

or metallic clothing, as was the case in Sa¬

held by the Kwakwaka'wakw, the native

khalin. While praying in order to fall into an

people of Canada’s Northwest Coast.)
These nipopo were collected in Novoe,
Sakhalin, in 1945. Both have the deep
patina of long-held personal treasures.
(Kan Wada Collection)

37.3

ecstatic state, one female shaman clattered
her Buddhist prayer beads {juzu) and murmured
Buddhist sutra to the dragon god Ryujin, a
god of Japanese folk belief. Another female
shaman beat a Japanese drum (uchiwadaiko)
with a handle because she was also a follower
of the Nichiren Buddhist sect, to which that
drum belongs.
In traditional Ainu society, women were
not allowed to play leading roles in any
religious ceremonies. This may explain why
even a female shaman remains a rather passive
37

medium during her seance. Gerhard Huber,
however, in his description of Hokkaido Ainu
culture describes prophecy as a power of the
female realm:
Hosting religious practices is largely a male
responsibility [among Ainu]. Females
should never pray, much less assume any
religious functions. Instead, women were
granted the right and power of prophecy
... as all males are essentially priests, all
females were shamans in the past. . . . For
37 / AINU SHAMANISM

263

example, before the chief took on an
important undertaking, he let his wife drink
sake and pray for divine revelations to get
some idea about the outcome. As he prayed,
the wife fell into the state of fantasy through
a kind of self-hypnosis. She stares into space
and .

her face reddens and her body

starts shaking. Then she reveals her illusion
as if she were singing a song (1964: 93).
Kindaichi (1942: 173), in his classic
volume Ainu jojisbi: Yukarcjaisetsu (Ainu epics:
Outlines of yukar), stated that "almost all
females were mediums in the Ainu society until
recently, without even asking the elders.. ..
The females were considered chosen to cook
sacred food for the gods, as well as be pos¬
sessed and give revelations." Although the role
of a female medium here is not comparable to
a Sakhalin shaman, whose job was a special¬
ized profession, it nevertheless suggests that
for a period of time in Hokkaido there existed
certain shamanistic practices involving women.
The actions listed by Kindaichi were, however,
much closer to the old ritual practices of
Honshu than to the typical shaman perfor¬
mances of the Sakhalin Ainu.
There are, nevertheless, other vague
references to the old forms of Hokkaido Ainu
shamanism. For example, occasional reports
mentioned that there were also male shamans
(tusukur) in Hokkaido. One of the first Ainu
shamans whom the Reverend Batchelor met
during his sojourn in Hokkaido (which lasted
for half a century) was male. He sat by the
fireside heating time with a shaman's stick and
displaying fox cranial bones (Batchelor 1927:

volume), people displayed straw dolls as a
form of protective magic (Kubodera and
Chiri 1940). The Sakhalin Ainu ascribed a
similar function to this practice although
there it was executed following a special
order by the local shamans. It is likely that
this as well as several other Hokkaido Ainu
ritual practices were the last vestiges of the
old shaman customs after the disappearance
of true shamans.
Despite the scarcity of good ethno¬
graphic evidence on the former Hokkaido
Ainu shamanistic patterns, valuable informa¬
tion can also be retrieved from Ainu myths
and language data as well as from travelers'
records from the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries.

274-79). The wooden sticks, which Batchelor
called "shaman's sticks,” were probably the

Ainu Terms for Shamanism and

same as clappers (repni) commonly used to

Related Practices

beat the rhythm of a yukar recitation in recent

The most general Ainu word for shamanism is

years. Mashiho Chiri (1954: 35) even sug¬

tusu (Jujutsu in Japanese), and a shaman is

gested that in Hokkaido Ainu dialect the

commonly called tusu/susu-kur by adding an

word repni formerly referred to the shaman

affix -kur, which refers to humans. This term

drumstick, as both this word and the term for

exists in both Hokkaido and Sakhalin Ainu

a shaman drum, kaco, appear in Hokkaido

dialects, although Sakhalin Ainu also call

Ainu mythology.

nupuru aynu (nupuru means "holy"), or nupuru

Hokkaido Ainu shamans once used special

kuru ("holy persons"—see Ohnuki-Tierney

drums, although no identifiable Hokkaido

1973b: 18).

shaman drum has been recovered to date. In

2 64

their shamans tusu aynu (aynu means "man"),

It is now widely assumed that the

In addition to tusu, some other terms

addition, it is believed that foretelling the

were documented in ethnographic literature

future with the use of animal cranial bones is

and collections of old Ainu folklore. Kyosuke

closely related to shamanistic practices.

Kindaichi in his volume of old Ainu songs

Among Hokkaido Ainu this type of divination

listed the word kinra and stated, "kinra in

was widely practiced tinder a special name,

Hokkaido means insanity and madness, while

kamuy-tusu. When the smallpox epidemics

in Sakhalin it refers to a curse or fortune¬

spread through Hokkaido (see Walker, this

telling" (1914: 36). It is fairly certain that this

TRADITIONAL CULTURE/ K. WADA

37.6

Shaman Belt

Sakhalin Ainu women used a sealskin
belt (kanikuh) to secure their clothes

word indicated shamanistic practices linked

shaman's origin through the mythical inter¬

with supernatural experience and behavior.

course between a divine spirit and a human

Chiri (1954: 36, 58, 646) listed several more

has been advanced by Shternberg (1925) as

words used to designate a shaman or shaman¬

a worldwide cultural phenomenon to which

like behavior, such as mipur, ojna, saman, imu,

the story of Saunnonnu among the Sakhalin

and sinot. Batchelor (1926), in his famous Aimi-

Ainu conforms.

Encjlish-Japanese Dictionary, explains that the

Although Ainu mythology has more

and hold their work knife and other

word saman or shaman means "magician." There

recently been influenced by Japanese folk¬

decorative brass ornaments, obtained

is a related morpheme, esamanki, which means

lore, it is still possible to recognize other

by trade with the mainland, which

"magic using animal cranial bones." Kindaichi

typical shamanistic figures therein. For

doubled as charms. These belts were

(1925: 33-34) also linked such Ainu words as

example, the Ainu cultural hero is usually

esamanki and saimon, which means "the hot

called kotan-kur-kamuy, ("creator of the

paraphernalia. Such belts often had

so important that they were buried with
a woman when she died. They were

water trial,” to old shamanistic practices that

world") although he is also referred to as

lin Ainu shamans. This belt was col¬

by the early twentieth century were already

sama-i-kur. Etymologically, this name prob¬

lected in Sakhalin by Arthur Curtiss

extinct in Hokkaido. Chiri (1953-62: 88)

ably means "the god who shamanizes."

James ca. 1898. (AMNH 70-14)

argues that a cultural hero of several Ainu

In fact, he has a character similar to that

creation myths, Samaikur, can be interpreted

of the so-called First Great Shaman in

as saman-ye-kur ("shaman say god"), asserting

Siberian mythology. The core theme of the

that this hero was indeed a shaman in ancient

Samaikur myth is the celestial journey that

society. Examining all these theories, it is

Mircea Eliade explored (1964). The etymol¬

obvious that a series of close word forms—

ogy of the various names of the main charac¬

saman, saimon, and samai-kur in the Ainu

ter of the Samaikur myth as well as his gaudy

language—is closely related to the Tungus

dress and ornaments, which were different

language, especially to the term sama/sauna

from those of the common people, clearly

also major sources of power for Sakha¬

(shaman) in the Ul'ta (Orok) language of the

identified him as a shaman. It seems more

closest Siberian neighbors to the Ainu in

appropriate, however, to describe Samaikur

central and southern Sakhalin.

as the Ainu "first shaman" and a cultural hero.

Ainu Myths Related to

mythologies to be depicted as the first

It is common for a cultural hero in shaman

the Origins of Shamanism
A Sakhalin Ainu story recorded by Pilsudski
(1912: 59) is believed to be the vestige of the
old myth related to the origins of shamanism.
It concerns a girl named Saunnonnu, who
was born to the ocean god and a woman.
She practiced tusu and created the island of
Chulaini (Kaiyaku-tou) through a set of special
shamanistic practices. The theme of a

37 / AINU

SHAMANISM

person who bestowed the most important
cultural elements to a people, including
the technique of self-oblivion. Therefore,
Samaikur certainly possessed some shaman¬
istic skills and served as a mediator between
the spiritual universe and human world as
demonstrated in his alternative name
Ainurakkur ("god with human elements").
There are several different versions of

265

i

the myth with regard to Samaikur's childhood,

According to Pilsudski, the bubyou

but he is generally depicted as "a boy who

appeared at puberty and its main symptoms

grew up by himself," either in solitude or

were depression, fatigue, and catatonic stupor.

reared by his brothers and sisters,- he had an

These symptoms, publicly recognized as signs

eagle as a caretaker in some Sakhalin Ainu

of bubyou, were quickly alleviated as soon as

versions. The place where he grew up is often

the person became a shaman. As Pilsudski

located at the base of a tree or in the moun¬

(1909a: I 84) put it, "others perceived those

tains. The appearance of a nest in ayachidamo

who showed the symptoms [of bubyou] as

tree (Fraxinus mandshurica) in one of the

people who were 'chosen to host the spirit

Sakhalin versions is particularly noteworthy: a

and to be used as an instrument of the spirit.'"

winged creature abducts the soul of a shaman

Among the women in Hokkaido who

candidate, brings it to the world tree, and his

are called shaman (tusukur) today, there are

soul is taken care of until the hero's initiation is

some who have had some sort of supernatural

complete. In a Hokkaido version of the same

experience in the past, but the existence of

myth the tree is replaced by a harunire tree

the Sakhalin-type bubyou recognized by the

(Ulmus davidiana), which in the creation myth is

community as a "shaman initiation" cannot be

said to be the first tree to take root in the

confirmed. However, Munro (1962: 163) cites

highest Hokkaido mountains. The main

the translation of certain prayers called "the

components of these stories are, however,

prayer for transforming the neurosis patients

more or less identical, and represent a typical

who were unable to obtain imu through a

pattern of the initiation mythology—again

treatment ritual into tusu " Imu is a well-

with an almost worldwide cultural distribution.

documented psychoneurotic pattern among

What should be pointed out here in
relation to the origins of Ainu shamanism is

Hokkaido Ainu (Batchelor 1927,- Munro 1962,Wada 1996: 307-1 1), but in folk terms it is a

that Samaikur was brought up in trees and

possession by a spirit: some 1 10 cases of imu

mountains, which may be representations of

were studied from 193 1 to 1937 among Ainu

the "center of the universe." The harunire tree

of Hokkaido and Sakhalin,- all were women

thus functions as the tree of life affecting the

called imu-juchi or imu-pakko, meaning "an old

birth and cultural training of an Ainu hero.

woman falling into a fit of imu." These

Moreover, as the nest of the winged spirit

temporary fits or possessions (imu) were seen

creature, the tree provides the context for the

as dangerous unless ritually controlled,- there

first Ainu shaman—Samaikur—to be raised by

are several reports that women with minor

a heavenly god. The central symbolism here is

symptoms were treated through the use of

the representation of animal mother(s) who

black magic by having them become an

take part in a shaman's upbringing and

established "/mu-possessor," while those with

initiation, which leads to the mythical bonding

heavy symptoms became a tusukur. As Munro

of a human soul with a powerful spirit.

(1962: 12-44) described, when the "purifica¬
tion" by the elders was successful, the evil

The Bubyou:

spirit was driven out and the virtuous spirit

An Ainu Shaman's Initiation

remaining became a person's protective spirit

It is next to impossible to obtain reliable informa¬

that would function as an assistant when a

tion today about the traditional initiation rite of

shamanistic seance was performed.

Ainu shaman as few living elders have memo¬

266

In view of the firm belief that imu can

ries of it. The only convincing firsthand

often be initiated by a special magical proce¬

documentation on Ainu shaman initiation is

dure, both its symptoms and the prescribed

found in a footnote in one of Pilsudski's works

treatment are reminiscent of the illness institu¬

(1909a). Together with Sakhalin Ainu initia¬

tionalized in shaman-initiation ceremonies of

tion mythology, which describes the origins

the past. Likewise, in the archaic Ainu myth

of shamanism as a mythical encounter between

collected in the northeastern part of Hokkaido

the divine spirit and human beings, there is

(Chiri 1973a), the tusukur1 s ecstatic dancing to

no question about the existence of bubyou as

the beating of a shaman's drum is described

an initiation rite. This telltale illness—the

using the word imu, which in that myth can be

time when the human soul is away from its

translated as "the shaman's jumping in ecstasy."

body and bonding with a spirit—inaugurates

In Hokkaido, Ainu tusukur never acted in such

the shaman's role as a conduit between the

a violent manner. Therefore, this myth may

human and supernatural world

he regarded as evidence that shamanism of

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / K

WADA

37.7

Marching to Ward off

Evil Spirits

Ainu men with swords drawn and
women (behind) march to exorcise
evil spirits, (courtesy of AMS)

the Sakhalin type had once been prevalent in

only changed some vocabularies, details, and

northern Hokkaido and that the word imu

objects used for or during shamanistic rituals.

originally signified "behavior typical of

With that in mind, what may be called the

shaman in ecstasy" (Chiri 1973a: 203).

"prototype" of Ainu shamanism had certainly

Of course, the possibility remains that

been established well before the Japanese

several features of Ainu traditional shamanism

influence made its impact in Hokkaido, and

were strongly influenced by their northern

also later in Sakhalin. The decline of Ainu

Siberian neighbors, the Tungus (particularly

shamanism in Hokkaido was triggered by the

Ul'ta/Orok) and the Nivkhi, both in Sakhalin

impact of Japanese culture introduced initially

and in Hokkaido, as evidenced by several

through fishing contracts, and it accelerated

similar elements in Sakhalin Ainu shamanistic

between the Edo and the Meiji periods.

practices as well as from such key borrowed

Although this topic is still being studied, Ainu

terms as sama, kaco, and others. On the other

shamanism seems to have been a composition

hand, we may assume that this influence came

of complex and elaborated rituals and beliefs

relatively late (in a general perspective of Ainu

that have much in common with the ancient

histoiy) and was rather superficial, in that it

eastern Siberian shamanism.

3 7/ AINU

SHAMANISM

267

A
38/Life and
Death
HlSAKAZU FUJIMURA

38.1

Offering Condolences

to the Chieftain

This scene, from Ainu Manners and

Customs (late nineteenth-century) by
Hokuyo Nishikawa, illustrates an elabo¬

\
inu people had their own

gender, the ancestors on both the paternal

interpretation of birth before the

and maternal side referred to their family

era of scientific explanations.

histories, and if all agreed, their conclusion

Their view evolved from their

determined the sex of the baby. Some

observations of different patterns of family

believed that a single consultation among the

structure. To explain such differences in

ancestors determined the gender of all the

families, especially issues concerning chil¬

babies that would be born to the couple,-

dren—why a married couple could not have a

others thought a meeting was held each time

child, why a woman would experience

the woman became pregnant.

repeated miscarriages,- why a family had many

The side that had priority in determin¬

sons but no daughters, or vice versa,- why a

ing the gender of offspring chose one person

couple had only one child, twins, or triplets,-

among their ancestors, someone who had

why one family had a handicapped child,- and

lived a previous life in the other (living)

why a couple lost their infants—the Ainu

world, to be born again to the couple. The

drew on their own medical practices as well as

order of rebirth depended on the way a

the concepts of animism that ordered their

particular person had lived his or her pre¬

world (Fujimura 1982, 1985b,-Obayashi 1997).

vious life, not on who had lived first: the

When a woman could not conceive,

more righteous a life he had as a human,

Ainu people believed it was the result of

the earlier his turn to be born again. Thus,

rate funeral gathering at which a large

broken negotiations among the couple's

those living in this world (on the earth) were

number of people pay their respects to

ancestors who were responsible for determin¬

considered privileged, for they had been

the chief's deceased child. (HML)

ing the gender of the unborn. In deciding

selected by their ancestors to be born again.

268

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

H

FUJIMURA

I_

38.2

Grave of an Ainu Chief

in Sakhalin

Sakhalin Ainu used elaborate con¬
structions in the burial of chiefs and
high-ranking leaders. This drawing

H

from Rinzo Mamiya's Illustrations
from Northern Ezo (1855) shows the

4.

details of a burial structure deco¬
rated with ornamental carving. A
similar construction in the area of
Shiretoko Ainu, northern Hokkaido,
was described by Dutch sailors in
1643. (HML)

i

; * *
l

N
y

i * * \
&<***
■ijL
^

& £ rz

fa'ii
^ 4 i- *

U
1/r^

j jj_ if

/C?

tr>
<T) -£_

Af •&'.
Jy

-T t s nt f
t

i

#

I) '** ■&S.

h

aHfi

it 1 k ? t

iL i-

i,

x t ?I

i -> 2-7 J? j|
CF>

38 /LIFE AND DEATH

RITUALS
269

38.6

Spirit Guardian

The black-and-white twisted-cotton cord

(eka eka) attached to this amulet was

This theory applied to all entities existing
on the earth, including animals, plants, tools,
and other things.

believed to have special powers to cure
disease and ward off illness; it was
often worn by women as a necklace or

The soul of the person who was to be
horn on earth and who had departed the body

tied around the wrist. Eka eka were

of the deceased and lived in the other world

made and worn only by Ainu women;

was thought to return to this world accompa¬

when used as a necklace it was called

rekutunpe. The cord received its power
only after the two strands had been
twisted and a respected elder had

nied by two guides. One was a goddess of
midwifery and the other was the so-called
possessing god (itimn kamuy-. everyone was

prayed to the god of fire, asking that it

believed to possess his own god from birth),

be given a soul. The end of the thread

who was interested in the soul of the baby

was then burned slightly in the fire.

and wished to live together with it,- the pos¬

Once empowered, the charm cord
could be attached to such materials
as herbs, a poison plant, glass beads,
or a grass coil, depending on one’s

sessing god was sometimes a single god, at
other times a multiple god. The task of the
midwife goddess was to place the soul in the

need. This amulet was collected by

mother's womb, oversee her delivery, and

Sakuzaemon Kodama. (AMS; Kodama

ensure the safe birth of the baby. After per¬

Collection 61025)

forming her duties the goddess would return
to the other world, sent off with words of

38.6

gratitude from the people of this world.

38.3

38.3, 38.4, 38.5

38.4
Mourning and Burial

After a death the body was wrapped in
ceremonial clothes, and the family,

When she began her journey back, she would

of seven or eight. The reason for this practice

take with her the soul of a person who had

was the high infant-mortality rate at that

just died in this world (figs. 38.1, 38.2).

time, for people believed that official naming

similarly attired, gathered to mourn the
deceased at home. After a suitable period

After the mother recuperated from the

had something to do with early death. The

the body was carried to the grave site

fatigue of delivery, her husband and father-in-

in a funeral procession. Rituals were

law performed a ceremony on behalf of the

rather created a name by combining various

then conducted, and the body was buried.

three generations of the family in order to

words that expressed the child's character or

(AMS; NAA 98-10405, 98-10406)

thank Fuchi, the goddess of home and hearth,

the parents' wishes for its future. Although

for the good health of the newborn and the

there were names with similar pronunciation,

mother. In this ritual, the baby met the fire

it was extremely rare to find exactly the same

goddess for the first time and the parents

name. Names like "cute thing" or "loving

asked for her protection in raising the baby.

creature" were not used because parents

As the baby matured, the possessing god also

feared that a god might become too closely

grew accordingly.

attached to the child and its spirit might be

The new baby was called by a tempo¬

2 70

Ainu did not have fixed common names but

taken away. Similarly, it was thought that an

rary name, often a repulsive one, and a

unpleasant name protected the child from

permanent name was not given until the age

losing its soul because an evil god would not

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

H. FUJIMURA

38.7, 38.8

Spirit Figures

In addition to nipopo dolls, Sakhalin
Ainu produced small humanlike
wooden carvings whose upper and
lower bodies were carved as a link.
Whether their lower sections were to
represent legs, fins, or flippers is not
clear, but the links themselves sug¬
gest metal chains, whose sounds and
brightness were believed by Siberian
native groups to attract favorable
spirits. (MPM N17361, N17363)

38.7

38.8). To ward off the evil spirit, parents
made every effort to take good care of the
child by praying to the gods for protection
of their offspring (figs. 38.6, 38.12, 38 13,
38.14). If a child eventually died, its possess¬
ing god departed for the next world with the
child's dead soul, and only then was the
relationship between them dissolved.
When children reached the age of
seven or eight their parents began teaching
them the necessary skills of life. Fathers
taught boys and mothers tutored girls by
using them as assistants in daily activities.
They employed a one-on-one teaching
method and catered to the child's abilities
to make sure that each one acquired the
competence to deal with life's problems,38.5

given the natural environment surrounding
he likely to become fond of it. Ainu parents

the Ainu people in those days, one had to

were also afraid that evil spirits of illness or

possess specific skills for self-defense. In

injury might detect a child's weakness in his

addition to learning pragmatic skills, the

formal name and attack his soul, causing him

children were repeatedly told many stories

to die; for this reason, even mothers and

that served as examples to them, tales

fathers were not supposed to call their child

about the ecosystems of animals and

by its permanent name.

plants, human relations, and gods and

By around age three a child sometimes
showed peculiar characteristics that were

souls. These stories enhanced the
children's ability to respond to danger with

thought to he signs of a possessing god with

flexibility. While there was no formal

an evil spirit. When this happened, the

school system, a hands-on educational

parents and other relatives tried to find the

process took place daily.

cause. If they could not determine the

Once they learned life skills, young

identity of an evil possessing god, they

men and women were regarded as self-

assumed that the god's power exceeded theirs

supporting and were treated and respected as

and asked for the help of a shaman (figs. 38.7,

independent people. As proof of adulthood,

38 / LIFE AND DEATH

RITUALS

27 i

38.9

Grave Markers

38.13

Grave markers were erected in the
form of posts: a man’s resembled a
spear, while a woman’s resembled
the eye of a needle. Leaving the
grave, mourners were not to look
back, sob, or otherwise express sor¬
row, or the soul of the deceased
would return to possess the living,
(courtesy of AMS)
38.9

38.10

Grave Posts and Burial Articles

This illustration from Shimanojo
Murakami’s Curious Sights of Ezo Island

men were given their family crest (itokpa),

families, and marriage became a consider¬

which showed the paternal family line, and

ation. There were various types of marriage

they were allowed to participate in religious

in the Ainu community: a child might be

rituals. Women were provided waistbands (fig.

promised in marriage by its parents before or

a woman's grave marker with its deposit,

3 1. \0)(raunkut), woven by their mothers in a

after its birth,- a young man and woman

including an iron pot, a reaping sickle, a

pattern that indicated the female family line.

might have met growing up. The most

container, and a beaded necklace, which

These crests and waistbands were abstract

important issue in deciding marriage was to

symbols of the family's ancestral gods. Specific

assure that the ancestors of both parties had

(1799) shows the form of a man’s grave
marker with his hunting equipment and

accompanied the owner to help in the
next life. (HML)

family matters—who their particular gods

not been married several generations back—

were, why these gods were their ancestral

they could not share the same ancestor gods

Even within Hokkaido, Ainu burial tradi¬

gods, and on what occasions the gods were to

in order to avoid consanguineous union.

tions varied considerably. This illustration

he prayed to—were relayed from generation

Because the Ainu frequently adopted chil¬

shows customs of western Hokkaido,

to generation in a confidential manner.

dren, it was also necessary to examine their

38.11

Grave Posts from West Ezo

where posts were engraved with personal
marks and adorned with inaw, in this re¬
gion, burial goods were not deposited on
the surface, but they were frequently bur¬
ied with the deceased. (HML)

272

The family was the smallest unit of the
society. When the training of young men and
women by their parents was completed, the

lineage, so crests and waistcloths served as
useful proof of family lines.
The Ainu people regard death to be the

young people were regarded as adults in the

separation of soul and body and considered

village, considered to be a collective body of

the soul to be immortal Humans experience

38.12

Ritual Sword

When an Ainu died it was believed they
went to another world where to survive
they needed the same tools and equip¬
ment as they had used in this world.
Men's grave goods included a bow,
quiver, knife, ikupasuy, and other items.
Swords were tools of a similar category,
but rather than bury such treasures,
wooden replicas (pons emush) were
made; such swords might be little more
than a piece of wood in a birchbark
sheath. In some areas, ritual swords
were kept under a man's pillow to pro¬

38.14

tect him from sickness and ensure that
children conceived by him would be
male. (MPM N17346)
38.13

Ritual Quiver

As in the case of a man's sword, a
small model quiver (pons ikayop) was

happy and sad times repeatedly throughout

Ainu people believed that all spirits

their lives and often deplore the problems

were immortal—even those of inanimate

from which they suffer. The Ainu believe that

objects—and never ceased to exist,- there¬

often made for use as a man’s charm

suffering is inflicted upon humans by gods in

fore, after an old person's death his or her

good upon his death. These models

order to strengthen human spirituality. Once

house would be burned so that the deceased

were carefully carved and decorated.

humans overcome life's difficulties, they

would have a place to live in the other world.

(MPM N17056)

become stronger and their level of spirituality

At the funeral service, people broke the late

is raised, so life is a time given by the gods to

person's utensils, tools, bows, and arrows,

during his lifetime and as a grave

38.14

Bear Fetish

man to become a noble person (a "saint," as

and these implements were buried with the

to have been produced solely by the

in Buddhism). A life that achieves this goal

corpse (figs. 38.3-38.5, 38.9-38.1 I). Because

Sakhalin Ainu. It is not known if they

in this world has promise in the next life and

all the spirits of the implements were alive in

Wooden figurines called inoka appear

had shamanic use, but they were used
as charms. Inoka were often covered
with the genital skin or pubic hair of a
female bear and were used in iyomante
ceremonies to promote fecundity
among bears. (ACM 4439)

38.15

hope for the earliest possible return to the

this world, the deceased person could begin

earth. Ainu (the word means "human" in the

to live another life by using them in the other

Ainu language) have a saying: "Become a

world. This view of the world was founded

righteous man among men." This is the way

on a belief in the immortality of all spirits

humans are supposed to exist and live.

and their transmigration between worlds.

Entrance to the Other World

The souls of the dead were often
thought to gain entrance to the spirit
world through caves, natural fissures
in the earth, or other remarkable
geological formations. This was one
such site known to the Ainu of the
Shiraoi region, (courtesy of AMS)

38 / LIFE AND DEATH

RITUALS

273

U

NTIL RECENTLY THE AlNU WERE

Kuriles. Today the oral traditions of these

language, and as is typical for

groups are to be found in various regions of

such groups, they had a rich

Mythology
and Animal
Tales
Shinko Ogihara

while very little materia! exists from the

a people without a written

Hokkaido where Sakhalin and Kurile Ainu

oral tradition encompassing various genres

settled. The materials 1 describe here are

and styles. Part of this tradition survives today

based on the oral traditions of the Iburi and

in the Ainu community as living oral compo¬

Hidaka areas of the Pacific coast of south¬

sitions, while other aspects are preserved only

western Hokkaido, where narratives have

as texts and recordings. Within Ainu oral

been preserved by virtue of the relatively

tradition there are several formally named

large Ainu population that continues to live

genres of verse and prose. Included in the

there. For this reason the oral traditions of

verse genre are epic styles known as kamuy-

this region have become a point of reference

yukar, oina, and yukar, each with a style of

for comparative studies of Ainu oral traditions

utterance, or "grace voice" (atomte itak, sakoro

found elsewhere in Hokkaido.

itak, or kamuy itak), that differs from the
common voice of prose (yayan itak).
As is the case with the oral traditions of

39.1

The Creator: Kotan-kor-kamuy
Kamuy is often interpreted as being similar to

arctic and subarctic native peoples, myths, as

the Japanese kami (god),- however, for the

a category of literature, do not constitute a

Ainu the word encompasses every phenom¬

special distinctive genre within the Ainu oral

enon of nature (including supernatural

tradition. While creation myths in particular

beings), including all aspects of the Ainu—

are presented in various forms of legends and

meaning "man" or "human"—themselves. For

Goddess of the Cave

This painting from Shimanojo
Murakami’s Curious Sights of Ezo Is¬

land (1799) illustrates a scene from
Ainu mythology. In this myth, a goddess
from the southern god land drifted
ashore and, finding herself without
food or shelter, took refuge in a cave.
Soon a dog carrying a flower appeared
and brought her food from the sea and
the mountains; some time later the
goddess gave birth to a baby dog.
Although this tale is one of sev¬
eral Ainu origin myths, many Ainu dis¬
like it because of the discrimination
they have faced from Japanese. The
word “A-inu" in Japanese means “Oh!
A dog!" and this taunt is all too famil¬
iar to Ainu schoolchildren, who con¬
tinue to be harassed cruelly. For this
reason parents of mixed Ainu-Japanese marriages often do not reveal
their ethnic background to their chil¬
dren. (NMNH 392,023-25)

tales, stories of the origins of Ainu culture are

the Ainu the world consists of kamuy and

restricted to the tales of a culture-hero in the

"human-Ainu,” and both are equal members of

genre known as oina. Most kamuy-yukar consist

nature itself and have the same interests,

of animal tales where the animal-hero narrates

feelings, and way of life. The difference lies

the story in the first person, but other natural

only in the territories they occupy, whether

beings or phenomena may also be the subjects

they are beings like animals, fish, birds, and

of these tales.

insects, or water, trees, sky, thunder, and so

Ainu oral literature also has a strong

274

on, with fire considered to be the "first"

regional cast, varying widely according to

among kamuy. Even artifacts like boats or

specific dialect. These differences are espe¬

grave posts are called kamuy,- in other words,

cially pronounced between groups of Ainu

kamuy completely surround the human/Ainu

who originated in Hokkaido and Sakhalin,

and are counterparts for all that human/Ainu

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / S.

OGIHARA

have contacts with. In this sense kamuy is

Culture Heros and Ainu Culture

unlike a "god," "animus," or "owner" as is the

The oina texts of the Iburi and Hidaka

case among native peoples of the North.

regions are concerned with Ainurakkur

The Ainu word kamuy has several

(literally, "he with a human-Ainu smell"),

different meanings, one of which may be

who as the ancestor of the Ainu is respon¬

translated as "deity." For example, the name of

sible for the lifestyle and customs of the

the creator, kotan-kor-kamuy, who was so huge

Ainu. The oina implies a sacred tradition, so

that he often ate whales grilled whole on

the culture hero is also called Oina-kamuy

giant wooden skewers, translates literally as

and Aeoina-kamuy, which mean "the kamuy

"land-making-deity." In one tale kotan-kor-

about whom we sing oina." Okikurumi (also

kamuy and his sister descend upon the top of

Okikirmui, Okikirma) is another name for

Mount Daisetsu, the highest peak in Hok¬

the hero of oina and generally thought to be

kaido, as it emerged from the ocean at the

identical to Ainurakkur. There is, however, a

dawn of time, and create Ainu mosir ("human

cycle of tales concerning Okikurumi and his

land") from the clouds. The black clouds

negative counterpart, Samaiukur, who plays

became rocks and the yellow ones soil, and

a rather ridiculous role much like that of the

then mountains, rivers, and islands were

trickster in the raven myths of the Koryak

formed. In some tales an animal—for

and arctic peoples of the Russian Far East

example, a dog or an otter—assists the

and Northwest Coast of North America.

creator in shaping the land. Another story

This similarity leads me to believe that

relates that kotan-kor-kamuy created the land

Okikurumi may have a northern origin quite

on what he thought was a solid spot in the

apart from the Ainurakkur myths in the Ainu

midst of muddy water, but when he returned

oral tradition.

to heaven he realized that he had formed the

Stylistically, oina has two specific

land on the back of a very large fish. To

features: one is the refrain (sakebe) and the

immobilize it, he sent two deities to push

other is its first-person narration by

down on the fish, but whenever the emissaries

Ainurakkur himself. The use of this refrain

release their pressure—for instance, to take

and first-person narration makes oina similar

their meals—the fish moves, thus causing

to kamuy-yukar, and in other places in

earthquakes (Sarashina 1971a, b).
The origin of human beings is vague in
Ainu myths. One tale ascribes their creation

Hokkaido Ainurakkur tales are included in
the genre of kamuy-yukar (although they
have quite different themes than the latter).

to kotan-kor-kamuy, who created a man from an

Some texts explain the heavenly origin of

elm tree, while in another version the Ainu

Ainurakkur by asserting that he was born on

sprang from a woman who married a dog. In

earth to an elm tree-maiden and the brother

the principal version of this story, a beautiful

of a heavenly deity, who visits the tree-

maiden drifts ashore in Hidaka, where a dog

maiden disguised as thunder,- the elm's

helps her hide in a cave (fig. 39.1); the dog

usefulness as fuel for making fire is reflected

and the maiden produce two children, a boy

in the garment of the culture hero, which is

and a girl, who become the ancestors of the

described as having a hem sparkling with

Ainu (Sarashina 1971a: 37-38). In the tales in

fire—possibly a reference to brilliant

which the creator is the main actor, kotan-kor-

garment embroidery.

kamuy and his spouse turn tools or belongings

Ainurakkur's first contributions to

or parts of the body into living creatures or

mankind are heroic deeds in which he

plants. For instance, according to one story,

exterminates wicked beings that bring harm

after completing the task of creating the land,

or disaster to humans: as a young boy caring

kotan-kor-kamuy decided to have a smoke. The

for his sister, he becomes aware of the

black soot from his smoke became the bear,

violence being done by evil monsters and

yellow smoke gave rise to the smallpox spirit,

rushes to fight them. The evil beings appear

and flints he tossed into the ocean turned into

as monstrous troutlike fish, otters, or

a whale and a sea lion. In another tale, the

monsters shaped like huge hills with arms

crane originated from kotan-kor-kamuy's wife's

and legs capable of destroying fishing lakes

spit, bush clover from her nose mucus, turtle

or abducting the first pair of deities dis¬

and octopus from her dress and her girdle

patched from heaven to earth. In one oina

being thrown into the sea, and finally, her

tale, which may have evolved from an

body hair turned into a type of grass.

attempt to explain an eclipse, Ainurakkur

39/ MYTHOLOGY AND TALES

275

rescues the sun goddess from an underground

sought to imitate the hero-animal's distinctive

chamber where she had been imprisoned by a

sound or the noise it might make in move¬

monster,- he makes a ship out of mist and sails

ment. For example, the refrain "ban kakkok"

her up into the sky in this vessel. In this way

clearly represents a cuckoo kamuy to a knowl¬

the world regained the sun and order was

edgeable listener, just as the sound "howewe hum"

restored to the universe (Kannari and

might indicate the bear kamuy. There are many

Kindaichi 1961).

variations of sakebe, but unfortunately many of

When Ainurakkur exterminates the

them can no longer be interpreted,- this is a

wicked beings, he instantly releases the living

common problem with oina but generally not

creatures they had captured and fills the rivers

with heroic-epic yukar.

with salmon and other fish, the sea with fish

Though kamuy-yukar show a great

and sea mammals, and the fields with deer—

diversity in content, ranging from myths to

all animals that are principal food sources

heroic epics to love stories, they are still

for the Ainu. Other tales relate that when

largely animal tales (Kubodera 1977a). In the

Ainurakkur ran away from heaven, he stole a

most simple kamuy-yukar, two types of animal

handful of millet and gave it to humans, thus

tales can be distinguished. In the first type, the

becoming the source of plants on earth.
There is a rather comical oina tale

hero narrates his own failure or bitter experi¬
ence while living in the human world. In a

featuring Ainurakkur and his bride, who is a

typical situation, an evil deed or foul disposi¬

heavenly maiden, that emphasizes the

tion usually leads the subject to a miserable

lovesickness felt by Ainurakkur and the

death, and in this case the hero-animal ends his

maiden (Kannari and Kindaichi 1961: version

narration with words addressed to his animal-

111). When the latter ascends back to the sky,

fellows, such as "do not have evil intentions

the maiden's father sets the suitor to various

toward humans'',- "do not make fun of the

tasks. First, he and his bride must listen to all

words of humans",- or "do not do these things."

the yukar, oina, and love songs that can be

In one example a fox kamuy went down the

recited by six different singers,- no matter how

river to visit an Ainu hamlet, where he snuck

humorous the performers are in their delivery

into the storehouse and devoured the fish he

of the songs, the young couple must not

found there,- he returned home and boasted of

laugh. For the second task, Ainurakkur and his

his exploit. The next time he dared to repeat

bride are instructed to make in a day every

the deed he found poisoned fish prepared for

kind of object used by Ainu men and women.

him by the humans, who intended to punish

Having successfully completed these trials,

the offender. The kamuy ends his narration

they are given the father's blessings to go

with a warning: "Now I'm dying, and from now

down to the land and show humans the

on, young fox-fellows, you better not steal fish

proper way to live. In this way, such imple¬

while going to visit the Ainu" (Kubodera

ments as mortars, pestles, winnowers, knives,

1977a: #22).

looms, and spatulas were given to men for

The second type of kamuy-yukar has a

their work,- embroidered clothing, head¬

theme quite different from this one. Here the

dresses, necklaces, and other goods were

hero narrates what has happened to him in

provided to the women (Kannari and

the human world and relates that his benevo¬
lent deed has gained him the respect of the

Kindaichi 1961).

Ainu. In one such tale, a hare kamuy tells how

276

Kamuy-yukar: Animal Tales

he warned the people of a tidal wave that was

Kamuy appear as heroes in kamuy-yukar, where

about to strike their village, but Samaiukur—

various animals, meteorological phenomena,

Okikurumi's "negative brother"—and his

certain kinds of artifacts, and cult deities

villagers would not listen to him. Thus insulted,

recite their own experiences in intercourse

the hare kamuy ran away from that village and

with the human-Ainu. The distinctive features

came to the village of Okikurumi, who told his

of this genre are its first-person narration, its

people to come out and bow to the hare kamuy.

refrain (sakebe), and the ritualized ending,

When the tidal wave broke upon the village,

usually phrased "thus spoke a kamuy" or "so

Okikurumi and his people escaped harm by

told some kamuy himself." The sakebe, repeated

running up the hillside, while Samaiukur and

either at the beginning or end of every verse

his villagers met catastrophe. The hare kamuy

or in some other place, gives kamuy-yukar

closes his narrative by saying that Okikurumi

rhythm and humor: originally the refrains

brewed sake, offered him a lot of it to drink,

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

S.

OGIHARA

and gave him in aw, and that he is now wor¬

verses whose content qualifies them as heroic

shiped as a high deity (Kubodera 1977a: #31).

epics. The heroes of this group are usually

In addition to these two types of kamuy-

animals who recount their love affairs and

yukar, there is a third type that provides

marriages to others of their own—or some¬

explanations about the significance of rituals,

times different—species, and quite often these

especially that of the bear-sending ceremony.

tales involve the culture-hero Okikurumi or

The verses carefully describe how the bear, as

his sister. In this respect they differ from the

a guest visiting the human world, is captured

standard heroic epics known as yukar, in

and reared,- how bears have a social and

which the hero is exclusively a youth named

family life similar to humans,- how they

Poiyaunpe (see Oginaka, this volume).

welcome the ritual entertainment given them,-

Many animal tales play a didactic role

and why bears like to visit the human world.

in Ainu society. Two types of kamuy-yukar—

In this way different kinds of animal kamuy

those about negative deeds and those about

reveal their individual natures and the divine

positive deeds—provided models for teach¬

origin of the rituals.

ing young children about proper behavior.

A fourth type of kamuy-yukar

Women, who are primarily responsible for

explains the origin of various living creatures

child-rearing, sang the rhythmic refrains

and inanimate objects. For example, a verse

of these verses, which were simple enough

about the cicada reveals that the insect

that children would learn them easily and

originated as an old woman who was trapped

sing them by themselves. Verses about

on the roof of her house when her village was

ritual and belief systems provided explana¬

struck by a tidal wave. Distraught, she cried

tions for these aspects of Ainu culture, while

so loudly that she aggravated all the kamuy

those about animals helped people under¬

and humans in the world until she was told

stand the origin and behaviors of different

she could only cry during the daylight hours

kamuy. Taken together, these four types

in summer (Kubodera 1977a: #34).

of kamuy-yukar instructed the younger gen¬

These four types of kamuy-yukar can be

erations about proper human behavior in

classified as myths according to theme and

general and, especially, their relationship

content, but there is another large group of

with kamuy.

39/ MYTHOLOGY AND TALES

277

Y

ukar is generally defined as

using the term sakorpe exceeds those using

Ainu epic poetry, particularly

yukar. In many cases, narrators who used to

tales of heroes. The classic study

call heroic epics sakorpe adopted the term yukar

of yukar (pronounced "yu-ka-ra"

from Sakhalin Ainu simply because others did

Yukar:

by most Ainu) is Kyosuke Kindaichi's 1931

so. While this trend is understandable given

treatise, A Study of Yukar: the Ainu Epics,

that yukar is an accepted part of the Japanese

Epics

which presents the genre as illustrated by

language, it is a shame to lose any words from

an 8,22 1 -line epic of an Ainu hero,- other

the Ainu vocabulary.

of Heroes
Mie Oginaka

forms of yukar take the form of poetry and

In Sakhalin narrators recited stories while

divine songs. The most complete presenta¬

lying down and looking up, which was also the

tion of yukar in English is a compilation

case in Hokkaido,- Tokunai Mogami described

published in Songs of Gods, Songs of Humans

this presentation form in Watarishima Hikki

(Philippi 1979).
In the Sakhalin dialect, yukara means "a

(Oshima Notes). In later years, both narrators
and audience sat together and beat the wooden

40.1 Man Reciting Yukar

song, to sing,” and heroic epics were called

hearth frame with a stick called a repni (fig. 40.1)

This illustration from Ancient Manners

bawki, but other terms were used in different

The audience would shout bet! bet! to create

and Customs of Ezo by Hokuyo

regions. For instance, in Hokkaido heroic epics

rhythm and to encourage the narrator.

Nishikawa shows a group of Ainu
seated around the hearth listening to

are called sakorpe ("having a tune") in areas from

People who grew up observing these

Tokachi to Kushiro in eastern Hokkaido,

performances learned how to recite them and

beating time with repni (sticks) on the

Bihoro and Kitami in the north, and Asahikawa

gradually became proficient narrators,

hearth frame. (HML)

in central Hokkaido. The number of regions

developing distinctive personal tunes,

278

TRADITIONAL CULTURE / M. OGINAKA

a man reciting traditional yukar, while

intonation, and diction, each subtly different

the first time from the outside.

from one another. Some recite rather emo¬

It was so huge and beautiful.

tionally, while others narrate in a quiet tone.

1 was mesmerized. . . .

Except for the fixed content of the story and

After staring at it awhile,

certain idiomatic phrases, the delivery often

I went on and soon came to a steep path

changes greatly under the influence of each

leading toward the forbidden mountains,

narrator's personality. After repeated perfor¬

mountains that had been prohibited

mances and with the passing on of stories to
following generations, yukar became even
more refined as an art form of oral tradition.
Many heroes of the epics reside in castles
in a fabulous land called Otashut (or Qtasam),
while the homes of other heroic characters are
found in various places,- Shinutapka is the most
frequently mentioned location. Kuro Yae, a

to village people since the old days.
Without hesitating, 1 took this path.
Passing beneath tall trees,
leaping over brush,
soon 1 arrived at the summit
where there were ponds and beautiful
trees.
I recognized it immediately as the
playground

narrator who lived in Shimosetsuri (located

of a god with whom I was familiar.

between Kushiro and Lake Kussharo) and

While I was playing there,

who considered that village his permanent

a big man carrying a golden staff came

home, was an excellent storyteller. Yae could
become absorbed in the world of sakorpe. The
hero of Yae's sakorpe lived in a castle in
Otashut and was called Pon-otast-un-kur
(pon = small,- otasbu, un = be,- kur = god/man,-

toward me,
flanked in front and behind by six young
men [six is read as "many" in Ainu].
He told them to shoot me.
Well, it was easy for me to overwhelm
them.

so, this name means "small otashut man").
Hokkaido has a place named Osorokotsu,
near Shiraoi, that is featured in a legend about
a nation-creating god (see Iwasaki-Goodman
and Nomoto, this volume). In the legend, the
god fell on his rear end after being surprised by
flying sparks as he tried to broil whale meat.

When the big man tried to attack me,
raising his golden staff over his head,
1 threw him into the pond
and rushed back to the castle—
just before my aunt woke up.
Thereafter my life continued as before
until one day some small birds came to me.

This was an enormous god, so enormous that

They said an evil woman

when he landed he created a pair of depres¬

saved the big man and married him.

sions large enough not only to hold the rock to

Recently they discovered the identity of

broil fish but also to contain several houses. In
some regions, this legend concerns the
progenitor of man, and the hero is "half-human
and half-god."
Much like the trickster transformation
figures in Native American mythology, the

the buck
and sent their followers to attack me.
So, making sure that my aunt was not
watching,
! again disguised myself as a buck
and dashed out into the country to find
the rascals.

heroes in Ainu epics can transform themselves
into deer and foxes, run in the sky, dive into
the earth and ocean, and are equipped with
the ability to always revive, all while still
being human.

The barking of vicious dogs announced
my arrival,
and the big man, the evil woman,
and their followers came out for battle.
Soon I heard a sound,

The following is a condensation of Yae's
favorite sakorpe, a story of an adventurous boy
who can turn himself into a deer:
1 live with my foster aunt
in a castle in the nation of Otashut.

the sound of an approaching god,
and I fought on, knowing that help would
come.
The god who descended to me was my
foster aunt

Above my bed is a costume

and she was carrying a woman's spear.

of deerskin and antlers.

From that moment on, we fought

One day, while my aunt dozed,
1 disguised myself as a buck and went out.
It was then that 1 saw the castle,
the castle where 1 lived,
for the first time,

40 / YUKAR:

EPIC POETRY

together.
We fought on, side-by-side, day and night,
traveling from one place to another
pursuing our enemies.
Finally, as we battled on,

2 79

we approached the nation of the evil
island.

listened to, the audience excitedly anticipates
the next development, usually cued by

By now there were only four enemies left.
Here, using shamanism,
by shifting quickly between sky and earth,

repetition. The idiomatic expression draws on
the nuances of time and place to engage the
listener in ways that written text cannot. In the

we finally prevailed.

days when heroic epics were narrated as part of
Well, now it's time for me to rush back to
my castle. . . .

daily life, the world they described was also a
part of everyday living. The action of the hero

In the full Ainu version, the narration is
quite detailed: it gives an excellent descrip¬
tion of nature, including the trees, rivers,

40.2 Contemporary Presentations

was admired and anticipated, and he was seen
as a cultural role model.
It is rare that a narration of an Ainu yukar

mountains, and fields,- the sunlight, wind, and

ever really ends,- unless specially requested, "the

rain,- and animal movements. The tone of the

end of the story" is left untold to interest the

battle scenes is ferocious and strident, while

audience in hearing a future installment. When

that of love is soft and mellow.

these epics are given for the deceased, however,

Some of the stories are quite long and

it is customary to complete the narration to

of Yukar

cannot be recited in one night. The use of

ensure that the dead will not hold any attach¬

Ainu today continue to recite yukar, re¬

repetition and details identifying even obvious

ment to this world. In similar fashion, when the

things is a device used often in oral traditions

story is for the gods, such as in the case of the

to create mood and enhance the reality of the

bear-sending ceremony (.iyomante), the last part

Tasuke Yamakawa—taken in Akan in

prose. Although the redundancy can be

of the story also remains untold, for people wish

the late 1980s by Morio Senke.

annoying in written works, when the story is

taining an important oral tradition, as
shown in this photograph of two Ainu
elders—(left) Zenjiro Hikawa and (right)

the gods to return to earth again to listen to the
ending of the epic.
Today the word yukar can be found even
in a small Japanese dictionary. Many dictio¬
naries define yukar as "the story of a hero,
Poiyaunpe," a word that actually means "a
male orphan from the new land'' and was
originally a nickname used only by the hero
Ponshinutap kaunkur. (Heroes are often
called by names that begin with "pon," which
in this case means "junior.")
Only a few narrators still remain who
are able to sustain the flow of words with
surging passion. With the audience joining in,
shouting bet! bet! as they followed the progress
of the story, these were breathtaking mo¬
ments of emotion both for the storyteller and
the listeners. It has been a long time since I
experienced such moments.

280

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

M. OCINAKA

Song of Kararat
(Carrion Crow) Goddess
This kamuy-yukar was recorded iii writing on
October 28, 1932, by Itsusbiko Kubodera from the

and only then

The peerless feast

did the gods

wore on to its conclusion.

become aware for the first time

After that,

of my existence.

I have remained

After that,

in my own house.

when wine was delivered

Every since then,

from the humans,

whenever the gods

A crow goddess amuses herself by performing the

1 was invited for the first time,

are worshiped

"dance of the glittering treasures, dance of the

and I was able

by the humans

glittering metals" (tama kin tapkar, kane kin

to attend a drinking feast.

and wine is delivered,

reciter Hiraga Etenoa.

tapkar). When she does this dance, acorns and
chestnuts come dropping down from her hands. News
of this dance of hers spreads among the gods, and she
begins to be invited to the drinking feasts of the gods.
The Ainu distinguished between two types of crows.-

I drank, and
o how very
delicious
was the wine!
As ! drank,

the hondo jungle crow (Corvus cononoides),

my heart

which was disliked and called shi-pashkur or shi-

was very

e-pashkur ("dung-crow," "dung-eating-crow")

mellowed by the wine,

and the carrion crow (kararat, Corvus corone),

mellowed by the liquor.

which was regarded as auspicious.

At that time

The text is kamuy-yukar 47 in Kubodera's Ainu

1 did

jojishi: Shinyo, seiden no kenkyu, pp. 218—20:

the dance of the glittering treasures,
the dance of the glittering metals,

I lived

moving up along the floor

in the Upper Heavens,

and down along the floor.

dwelling

As I danced,

among the gods.

acorns came falling down

However,

from one of my hands,

whenever 1 would hear

and chestnuts came falling down

the sounds of feasting,

from my other hand.

the sounds of drinking

Then the gods

of the gods

began to race each other

who had received [presents of]

to pick up

human inaw

the chestnuts

and human wine,

and to pick up

1 would always

the acorns

there is not a banquet,
not a drinking feast
from which I am
ever omitted.
1 am always invited
and attend every feast,
and as I drink,
my spirits are
mellowed by the wine.
After that
I do
the dance of the glittering metals,
the dance of the glittering jewels
among the guests at the feast,
and acorns fall down
from one of my hands,
and chestnuts fall down
from my other hand.
The gods
race each other
to pick up
the chestnuts
and the acorns.
Sounds of loud laughter,
sounds of great merriment
rise up all at once,
and I take

be longing to have them.

on the floor.

I longed for them

Sounds of loud laughter,

so very much that,

sounds of great merriment

when I would get lonely,

rose up all at once.

I would stand up and

While this was going on,

would do

the God Ruling

the dance of the glittering treasures,

the Upper Heavens

I continue to live

the dance of the glittering metals

spoke these words:

on and on.

on a floor at the head of the fireplace.

"I did not know

Then acorns would come dropping

until now

down

that the weighty deity

from one of my hands,

the kararat goddess

and chestnuts would come dropping

had her dwelling

down

so very close by,

from my other hand.

near my own house.

Thanks to this,

One of the reasons

I was able to amuse myself,

why I invited

and this was the way

the kararat goddess

I continued to live

was because 1 wished

on and on

to apologize to her,

uneventfully.

but look

Then news spread

how mellowed by the wine

among the gods

are her spirits!"

that I was doing this,

Thus did he speak.

40/ YUKAR

EPIC POETRY

delight in all this
as 1 attend
all the noble drinking feasts,
the noble feasts.
This is the way

Whenever wine
or inaw
are delivered
from the humans,
I am given
portions of inaw
and portions of wine,
and this enhances
my glory as a deity.
This is the way
I continue to live
on and on
uneventfully.

281

A

mong the traditional Ainu

41/To Live
Is to Sing

a dance of a turtle swimming through the

areas in Hokkaido, the crane

waves, and the other performed a crane

dance (sarorun rimse; fig. 41.1) has

dance. Old Ainu celebrate the new year

the largest number of variations and is most

by dancing like turtles and cranes—this

widely distributed in the region (Nihon

indeed is the glory of the Meiji Emperor era"

Kokogaku Kyokai 1965). Most of the Ainu

(Nagata 1911).

dances reported by the Wajin (Japanese) at
Kazuyuki Tanimoto

sang songs and danced. One performed

dances still performed in various

Nagata seems to have associated the

the end of Tokugawa Shogunate era refer to

depiction of turtles and cranes with a tradi¬

the crane dance. In one of these records (Ezo

tional Japanese aphorism on longevity—

soshi, I 808), Tokunai Mogami, a shogunate

"cranes live 1,000 years, turtles live 10,000

official sent to Ezo, wrote, "When the

years"—and deduced that his guests wished

banquet livened up, women stood up and

him a long life. The crane dance, which is

began to dance in a circle, keeping time by

now known to Ainu throughout Hokkaido,

clapping and shouting. Among the dances

may therefore be an example of a dance form

performed was the crane dance, one that

that the Ainu developed in response to

imitated the cranes opening their wings and

pressure exerted by the shogunate system in

eating." Mogami observed the dance per¬

Ezo, an element of Japanese culture seen

formed at "banquets" held on such occasions

reflected in an Ainu mirror.

as uimam, meetings with the local shogunate

In 1857 Nakanojoh Tagawa, a clansman

officers who governed Ezo, and at receptions

of the domain of Sendai, wrote in his travel

for officials on inspection visits. It can be

journal the lyrics of a song accompanying a

assumed that the Ainu felt obliged to perform

crane dance:

41.1 Crane Dance
The crane dance, known as sarorun

rimse or hararki, is one of the most
widespread of traditional Ainu dances.
Tokunai Mogami, a shogunate official
who lived in Ezo, described it in 1790,
and a few years later this dance was
painted in a spirited manner by Gentan
Tani in his Drawings of Travels Through

Ezo (1799). (HML)

the crane dance on these occasions as a

pirika menoko-to

courtesy to their hosts.

tonasino mokoro

go to bed early

More than a century later, a report from

nesatta paskor

until crows sing tomorrow

the local shogunate office described another

chishikorachi

want to sleep in

greeting ceremony: "Two Ainu elders came

These lyrics in the Ainu language are a

over for New Year's greetings. 1 offered sake

translation of a Wajin (Japanese) Dodoitsu, or

with an ikupasuy on a takatsuki [a small saucer-

lyrical song, "Killing crows of the world, 1 want

stand] telling them to conduct kamuynomi

to sleep in with the master." This song, like the

[prayers to the gods]. They were very pleased

dance itself, also spread throughout Hokkaido.

and had sake in the Ainu manner and began
telling old stories.. . . Soon the two old men

282

with a beautiful woman

TRADITIONAL CULTURE /

K. TANIMOTO

The evolution of many songs shows
how conflict between the culture of the

The meaning and functions of songs
and dances in traditional Ainu society can be
collectively observed in the ceremonies that
are a symbolic reflection of the hunting and
fishing way of life, such as the bear-sending
(iyomante) and owl-sending rituals. As the

time for such ceremonies neared, women
pounded grains such as barnyard millet with
a mortar and pestle to make sake and
dumplings to offer to the gods. Chants like
the sake karupopo (sake-making song) and the
iyuta upopo (the pounding song) sung on these

occasions are not labor songs,- rather, they are
magic-oriented, for they are sung to ward off
evil spirits. For instance, in the lyrics of the
pounding song, "bessa iyuta hessa, hessa pirke
hessa" (let's pound, let's pound), hessa is

shouted repeatedly. Hessa derives from hess,
a kind of "magical breath" used to exorcise
impurities that possessed the body, and this
became the refrain of many Ainu songs.
In Sakhalin, Ainu people sing and dance
iso ko hechiri (the bear dance) around the cage

of the bear cubs for several days prior to the
ceremony. The accompanying song, which
suggests the roar of a bear, energizes the
bear, the central focus of the ritual, and thus
serves to invite the bear god to the cer¬
emony. This singing causes the bear spirit,
which lives in the surrounding mountains, to
respond and join in, creating a noisy atmo¬
sphere. The sound "da da" in the lyrics is
meant to imitate a bear's roar, one of many
such examples of onomatopoeia in Ainu oral
traditions. The growls of animals, chirps of
birds, and imitations of the sounds of nature
such as rain and wind are basic elements of
the melody in many Ainu songs. The tune of
an epic kamuy-yukar (song of the gods) in
which the hero is an animal god is typical:
the sounds of animal gods, such as frogs and
owls, and the imitation of sounds created by

41.3

41.2, 41.3

Playing the Mmmm

One of the old Ainu instruments is the

mukkuri, which produces sounds like
a mouth harp. It consists of a thin

Wajin, the ruler, and that of the Ainu, the

animal movements are incorporated as a

ruled, was expressed through integration. The

refrain, while the lyrics telling the story are

traditional Ainu "Song of good hunting" with

inserted between the refrains. For example:

piece of bamboo with a semidetached

lyrics expressing "abundant deer, abundant

tonguelike reed in the center which

fish" was gradually replaced by a "farming

vibrates when the wood is given sharp,

song" in which Japanese and Ainu words were

repetitive jerks on the toggle string.

mixed. The process of transformation from

By varying the passage of air and size

Han cuckoo as always
Han cuckoo every place
Han kakkok rukun mosita Han cuckoo in the
heavens
Han kakkok ranrna kame
Han kakkok oka anike

their original hunting and fishing way of life

Here, “ban kakkok" imitates the sound of the

produce a variety of sounds. There can

to an agricultural culture imposed by the

cuckoo, a hero in kamuy-yukar.

be no simpler method of producing

Japanese is clearly reflected in the songs and

Ainu people not only imitate the

music except with the human voice.

dances passed down for generations. These

characteristic sounds of each animal and bird,

also expressed the various thoughts and

but they often mimic their movements in

in Ainu Manners and Customs. (BMA

feelings of the Ainu people as these changes

their dances. Many animal dances and songs,

12.167; HML)

took place.

including the aforementioned crane dance

of the mouth cavity, the player can

The method of playing is demonstrated
in an illustration by Hokuyo Nishikawa

41 / SONG AND MUSIC

283

41.5

41.5, 41.6

Tonkori

Tonkori, such as these five- and six¬
stringed versions, varied considerably
in shape. The five-stringed tonkori was

(.sarorun rimse), the rain swal¬
low dance (chikap ne), and the fox dance
(chironnup rimse), incorporate animal features

collected by Mabel Todd in Hokkaido in

that are linked to belief in animal spirits and

called ukouk. The first

1896; the six-stringed version was col¬

the Ainu hunting and fishing lifestyle.

singer begins singing, and then the next

lected by Berthold Laufer in Sakhalin in
1900. (PEM E3382; AMNH 70-1256)

In the bear ceremony, songs that explain
each scene are sung according to the program

person sings the same notes and words one beat
behind. This continues, regardless of the

of the rite. Symbolic meaning and positioning

number of singers, round after round The term

of certain scenes are interpreted and ex¬

upopo is onomatopoetic, from the sound of

plained through the songs and dances,
creating a sequence. When a cub is taken
from the cage:
peiorep rekdw

boiling food, which creates a unique cacophony.
Unlike polyphonic Western music, which has a
more melodic and harmonic character, each

cub is singing

singer's segment is not designed to be distin¬

set ko rimse

dance, facing the cage

guished independently,- it simply serves to

set ko tapkar

jump toward the cage

create musical "chaos,” which increases passion

During the ceremony, as a blunt ceremonial

in the ceremony.

arrow (heper-ay) is shot at the cub so that he

Such techniques, which produce ritual

can take it to the hear god as a souvenir, the

sites for magical ceremonies by transforming

following is sung:

everyday space into chaos, are also employed

ay ta haw o hay "Hai," the shooting sound
of the arrow

in dancing. In the bear dance (iso ko hechiri) of
the Sakhalin Ainu, dancers are divided into two
groups,- they advance in loops, coiling and

When the cub is killed by choking it between
41.4

Playing the Tonkori

The tonkori is a four-, five-, or six¬

two logs after it is shot with a real arrow, the
words below are sung:

stringed instrument that is played
vertically by plucking with the fingers,

hutta tu karari

of bamboo

as shown in Teisuke Murakami's
illustration. Ainu used the tonkori

being placed on the leaf

emush karari

being placed on the sword

frequently to accompany yukar presen¬

hoy surse

let's cut the throat

tations. It was such an important part

hoy susumau

ah, it is dead

of Ainu culture that it was considered a
god in itself. The maker of a tonkori
gave it life by placing a small pebble
inside the body of the instrument. (HUL)

subgroups and advances in opposite directions,
creating a chaotic situation when the beginning
and end of the lines become unclear.
On festival nights, when people
celebrate with the gods, various dances are
performed indoors (fig. 41.8). At such times
the sword dance (emush rimse) may be performed

And when the bear god is sent off to the god
land, as the dead cub lies in front of the altar:
kamuy hopni na

by men. The dancers hold an arm out with
the palm up, and they move the arm up and

the god is about to leave

down while dancing with heavy steps and

hio rimse

let's dance

making a banging sound. This dance simu¬

hechiw

dance

The songs that are sung and danced

41.4

crossing each other. Each group breaks into two

lates a ritual exorcism that men perform when
a village is struck by disaster,- the brandishing

during ceremonies are generally called rimse or

of swords and vigorous stomping scare away

upopo (hechiri in Sakhalin). In some regions,

evil spirits (fig. 41.7). Some women's dances,

upopo is a general term for songs performed

such as u-sampe-wante (compare the hearts),

while sitting. This "sitting song" is sung by

ara hukkun, and hachinna (a dance contest),

people who sit in a circle and beat lightly on

have competitive elements: two people or two

the lid of a lacquerware treasure box,- it is

groups face each other and compete to see

characterized by the way it is sung, which is

which side can continue the vigorous dance

the longest. Such competitive song and dance

The disappearance of the traditional

is found in various northern ethnic groups.

Ainu lifestyle and the loss of the environ¬

One such activity inviting direct

ment that fostered their traditional culture

comparison with northern peoples is the

can be attributed to the government's

"throat game" or throat-singing (rekuxkara,

assimilation policy over the past 200 years,-

literally "throat-make") of the Sakhalin Ainu.

in particular, changes after World War II

This is an unusual game in which two (or

have had a drastic effect on traditional songs

sometimes more) women sit facing each

and dances. The ukouk singing method

other, and each player makes a megaphone

mentioned previously serves as an example:

with her cupped hands and connects the ends

in the 1950s all the people who were asked

The sword dance has been per¬

of the "speaker" to her partner's. They then

to gather to record upopo songs could sing in

formed by the Ainu at least since the

begin making sounds into their opponent's

the ukouk style, although the situation varied

mouth by closing their throat and aspirating

depending on the region. During the 1960s

strongly. The players exercise their ingenuity

people needed practice before recording. In

41.7

Sword Dance

eighteenth century, when it ap¬
peared in Ainu-e illustrating exor¬
cism rituals. This dance is one of
many instances in which a foreign

by creating different sounds that combine

the 1970s it was impossible to find enough

element—in this case the sword—

high/low, long/short, exhalation/inhalation,

singers in one area, and help from other

has been adopted into Ainu culture

and stress/relief voicing. Similar games are

districts was needed. In the 1980s people sang

and transformed into a purely Ainu

found among Eastern Canadian hunt and

in unison instead of ukouk in most areas, and the

Siberian Chukchi. While today these games

number of songs had decreased significantly.

tradition. Sword dances are per¬
formed regularly for tourists at the
Ainu Museum at Shiraoi, as seen

are simply thought of as women's traditional

here. (Courtesy of AMS)

play, their origins were not confined to play.

41.7

In recent years, however, the number of
groups trying to preserve Ainu traditional

41.8

For example, the Ainu believed that throat¬

songs and dances has increased, and their

Although some maintain that Ainu

singing had the power to call the god who

activities have accelerated. At present, more

culture has become little more than

could scare away such epidemics as smallpox,-

than twenty such preservation groups are

perhaps these games were once related to

active in Hokkaido,- of those, seventeen are

magical power or shamanism.

designated as an Intangible Cultural Asset by

41.8

Dancing Continues

a "museum culture” preserved only
for tourists and for commercial pur¬
poses, a few Ainu continue to practice
their traditions in the privacy of their

While songs and dances for ceremonies

homes. This sword dance was photo¬

are basically performed in groups, most lyric

1960). Members of the groups are learning

graphed by Sister M. Inez Hilger during

songs (sinotcba) that express personal emotions

directly from elders, recording songs, and

her visit to Hokkaido in 1965. On

the national government (Ainu ni densho

are sung by one singer. Examples include

reconstructing songs and dances that once

dances were designated Intangible

iyobaocbisi (sorrow songs), sung with tears,

were lost by utilizing existing recordings and

Cultural Assets, which along with the

expressing agony and pains,- yaikatckara (love

visual materials. Moreover, different groups

recent passage of the Ainu Shinpo

songs) that express feelings for a lover,- and

come together for cultural festivals, and

(the new law on promotion of Ainu

yaishama, a kind of an impromptu song in

active exchanges with various ethnic groups

which a singer sings whatever flows into his

overseas such as the Nivkhi of Sakhalin,

January 21, 1984, traditional Ainu

culture) may sustain these traditions
into the future. (NAA T-10)

mind between refrains of "yaisbamanma."

Native Americans, Canadian Inuit, Scandina¬

Because these songs are produced in the

vian Saami, and other indigenous populations

course of daily life, any changes in lifestyle

in Taiwan, Australia, and New Zealand are

directly influenced the melodies, and in the

underway. These activities, intended to

areas where early contact with Wajin oc¬

"express and pass on true Ainu spirit and

curred, the melodies of lyric songs were soon

energy based on tradition,' have strengthened

altered to Japanese-style folksongs.

the sense of identity among the Ainu people.

41 / SONG AND MUSIC

285

i

|

!

:

S1S1SI

Sfc J

|pM|

I

N ITS ENCOUNTER WITH A MODERN INDUS-

trialized society traditional Ainu

this volume). Men, on the other hand, were
the woodworkers. They not only built such

culture, like many native cultures, was

fundamental constructions as houses but

transformed,- that process of change is

also carved the various items used in reli¬

42/Ainu Art:

reflected in many facets of Ainu society
today. The most visible changes occurred in

such as the very important ikttpnstiy, or prayer

The Beginnings

Ainu art,- for example, fishskin garments with

sticks, inaw, or sacred shaved sticks and staffs,

of Tradition
Chisato O. Dubreuil

gious ceremonies to honor the gods (kamuy),

designs stitched with durable, waterproof

and inatp-kike, bundles of shavings. Men were

animal sinew gave way over time to cotton

also responsible for creating such utilitarian

garments with designs made of imported

items as intricately carved bowls, plates, and

silk, while wooden carvings developed an

spoons. These opportunities for artistic

increasing abstractness rarely matched in

expression could more accurately be de¬

any culture. All through the traditional

scribed as cultural expectations, which not

period—which begins, according to earliest

only dictated gender roles but also defined

known artistic evidence, around the thir¬

the acceptable limits of artistic subject mat¬

teenth century and includes the transitional

ter, medium, and motivation.

years inaugurated with the Meiji Restoration
of the 1 860s to after the turn of the cen¬

Ainu Women as Fabric Artists:

tury—the creative process in its entirety was

Tradition and Originality

governed by fundamental cultural rules. For
example, gender determined the form of
artistic expression practiced by all members
of Ainu traditional society. Women were
responsible for all clothes construction and
for the distinctively stylized artwork which
is found on most Ainu textiles (see Kodama,
42.1

Ainu Fashion

Sewing was a very important task for Ainu
women. It was a means of being highly
appreciated not only as wife and mother but
as a fabric artist as well. The great amount of
time that Ainu women spent on needlework,
sewing, and creating original designs was
even sung about in one of the epic narratives
(yukar), entitled Yaosbkep-kamuy (Song of the

Ainu announced their ethnic identity by

Spider Goddess):

the design of their clothing, tools, and
implements. Within the conventions of

Doing nothing but needlework,

different garment types and regional

I remained with my eyes

styles, Ainu textile artists found innu¬

focused on a single spot,

merable ways to express artistry and

and this is the way

individuality while remaining distinc¬

I continued to live

tively “Ainu.” A sample of Ainu finery

on and on until . . .

is seen in the image for December

(Kubodera 1977a: 55-58; the translated

from Ainu Manners and Customs by

narrative in Philippi 1979: 78)

Byozan Hirasawa (seen here in a copy
dating from after 1872), which depicts

While the decorative designs began as simple

preparations for the iyomante (bear¬

embroidery on fishskin (fig. 42.2) and woven

sending) ceremony. (HMH)

elm-bark fabric (attusb) garments (fig. 42.3),
later pieces of colorful cloth obtained
through trade were integrated into traditional
designs. Silk, wool, and later cotton were
extremely costly, but they became so impor¬
tant to the Ainu that traders from Santan and
Manchuria (see S. Sasaki, this volume) often
took as payment for the material the children of
the Ainu, who could then be trained as
interpreters to expedite trading. It is estimated
that possibly hundreds of Ainu were assimilated
into the mainland culture of the traders during
the seventy to one hundred years of the

< Chieftain of Heshikai, Poloya

This Ainu-e, copied by Teiki Kojima from

eighteenth and nineteenth centuries during

Portraits of Ezo Chieftains by Hakyo

which this practice took place (S. Kodama

Kakizaki, shows the proper manner of

1970c: 74).

carrying a smoking kit, with the imple¬

Because of the high cost of doing

ments hung from a man's belt. (Y. and

business with mainland Asia, and later with

M. Kitao Collection)

42 / BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

287

42.2

Child’s Salmon-Skin Coat

Originally all Ainu garments were made
of skin, fur, and feathers, and these
types of clothing survived in Sakhalin
and the Kurile Islands into the twenti¬
eth century. Salmon skin was highly
prized for making strong, light, du¬
rable, waterproof garments. Sakhalin
Ainu decorated fishskin garments with
delicate applique, as did their neigh¬
bors in the lower Amur River region.
This child's coat has a Sakhalin Ainu
cut but was collected in Hokkaido—
like people, artifacts often end up far
from home. This coat may have come
to Hokkaido with Ainu refugees ex¬
pelled when Sakhalin was turned over
to the Russians in 1875. In 1896 it
was sold to Mrs. Mabel Loomis Todd,
a participant in an Amherst College
expedition that came to to Hokkaido
view a solar eclipse. (PEM E3390)

288

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBRELII!

42.3

Attush Robe

After the introduction of the
backstrap loom, Ainu ancestors
began weaving attush, cloth made
from the inner bark of the elm tree
and from linden and nettle plants.
Men were responsible for procuring
the bark, but weaving, sewing, and
decorating clothing were women's
tasks. Designs were embroidered
on old cotton clothing or fabric
scraps obtained from the Japanese
and then sewn onto the attush.
Although many anthropologists have
been reluctant to believe it, Ainu
insist that the designs have no
meaning and are done only to
please the gods. This man’s robe
was collected in Tsuishikari, Hok¬
kaido, by Romyn Hitchcock during a
trip on behalf of the Smithsonian in
1888. (NMNH E150779)

42 / BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

28 9

42.4

Ruunpe

The ruunpe, a distinctive, colorful,
intricate garment, is found on the
Pacific Coast of Hokkaido from Yakumo
to Abuta, and from Usu to Shiraoi. For a
photograph of someone—presumably
the owner/designer/artist—wearing
this garment at the time of sale in 1909,
see figure 45.16.(UPM L122-19)

290

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

the Japanese, Ainu garments continued to be

was thought that a garment made without a

made of attush with imported cloth normally

purpose would not have a soul. The most

used only for decoration until the early

important thing to know before beginning a

twentieth century. The fabric remnants and

new garment was who would wear the

other materials needed to complete more

clothes (Fujimura 1985a: 17-19). Size was

intricate garments were accumulated over a

not the source of concern because other

long period of time, and some garments, such

than length, there were no structural

as the ruunpc, took up to three years to

differences between the garments of men

complete (Mikami 1986: 87). Imported cloth

and women. Innovation in design which was

was valued so highly that Ainu men and

highly prized, differentiated women's skill

women would often wear small cotton strips,

to decide on a design never produced before

usually red, through slits in
their ears as a sign of wealth
and prestige. Gradually
cotton became more avail¬
able, particularly in areas that
42.5

Learning Designs

Girls learned Ainu designs at a very

had ready access to trade

young age by tracing the patterns in

goods,- all-cotton gowns

the sand. They took their lessons

began to appear around the

seriously because they knew they

end of the Edo period, but

would be judged for the rest of their

they never totally replaced

lives on how well they designed the
family's clothes. Shimanojo Murakami
recorded this lesson in a scene from

attush garments.
An Ainu woman put her

his Curious Sights of Ezo Island

soul into each stitch as she

(1799). (HML)

made a garment because it
42.5

42.6

and choose the material and colors for it, the

Embroidered Fishskin Boots

seamstress contemplated all aspects of the

These fishskin boots were collected
by Edward S. Morse in 1882 from

person who was going to wear the garment

the Ainu of the Ishikari River region

and visualized the person as he or she wore

in Hokkaido, and they

it. It was this process that elevated an Ainu

are still stuffed with

garment to wearable art (fig. 42.4).

the original cotton
grass used to keep

The basic designs were passed down

the feet warm. It is

from mother to daughter,- however, many

unusual to find

Ainu girls learned not from formal instruc¬

embroidery applied

tion from their mothers but by accepting the

directly to the fishskin,
as seen here, because

cultural expectation that each girl would

the work could not be

become accomplished at this art form on her

transferred to a new

own initiative, learning all the variations of

garment when the

the regional designs. Among the interesting

original wore out.

paintings of Ainu life by Shimanojo

These boots have
seen heavy use.

Murakami compiled in Ezo-shima kikan (Curious

(PEM E491)

Sights ojEzo Island) is one that shows an adult
woman drawing patterns in the sand at a
beach for two little girls to practice (fig.
42.5). Either formally or informally women
were expected to learn the basics of Ainu
traditional patterns and design and then
create their own. Although these designs are
extremely complex and each was unique, the
seamstress did not use a fixed pattern to
trace on the cloth. Ainu designs are a
combination of, and variation on, a few
simple design elements, but the juxtaposition
of many interrelated elements is what makes
Ainu designs so exciting and unique.

42/BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

2 91

While each garment design was an

role in such Ainu religious rituals as exorcism

original, most Ainu scholars agree that each

and, to a lesser degree, in their mythology,

band of geographically separated Ainu had a

no other references support Sayce's claim.

similarity of design that identified the wearer

In another example, V. and T. Hauge

as coming from a certain region. However,

describe designs on the back of some

this idea has led many researchers to assume

garments as prominent symbols of the owl,

that all persons from the same area would

guardian god of the village (1978: 247). It

wear the same design,- my examination of

would be easy to misinterpret these paired

hundreds of garments suggests that there are

eyelike shapes, which appear frequently in

too many design anomalies for this to be true.

Ainu design, and other stylized designs as

I hypothesize that when a woman married a

bears or other representative forms, particu¬

man from a different band—which was

larly if one were influenced by other ethnic

usually the case—she may have combined the

art such as that of Northwest Coast Native

generic designs from each region to create a

America and tried to find parallels with it.

hybrid that was, in a sense, a totally new

Another common idea is that all Ainu

design. It must have been very challenging,

designs can be traced back to their respect

creatively, to stay within the bounds of

for the bear. However, no Ainu elder or

tradition and at the same time make the subtle

cultural leader, man or woman, supports

but distinct design changes necessary for peer

these ideas.

recognition, social acceptance, and family and
personal pride.

All of the elder Ainu women I inter¬
viewed stated that they would never incor¬
porate designs of wild animals into their
garments because they adored, worshipped,
and respected animals and their spirits as
kamuy. They expressed much fear that the
spirits would become angry if they were
"trapped" in the design or in any other mode
of artistic expression,- this taboo also ex¬
tended to humans represented in art. Isabella
Bird, a wealthy author and adventuress from
England who traveled throughout Japan in
1878, experienced this taboo firsthand when
toward the end of her trip she spent a month
with the Ainu. An amateur artist, she found
herself with several elder Ainu men and,
unbeknownst to anyone, started to sketch
one of them. She states:
1 took a rough sketch of one of the
handsomest, and showed it to him, asked
if he would have it, but instead of being
amused or pleased, he showed symptoms

42.7

Woman’s Tattooed Arm

The Ainu believed that tattoos on the
face, arms, and hands protected
women from harmful disease and

The Meaning of the Designs
The meaning of the designs on clothing has
long fascinated Ainu researchers, both

misfortune. Similar types of tattoos

Japanese and Western anthropologists as well

were worn by early Eskimo peoples of

as native Ainu scholars. While the Ainu tried

the Bering Sea region as early as

to live all facets of their lives honoring their

2,000 years ago. These Ainu tattoos

gods (kamuy), incorporating any of the animal

were recorded by Shimanojo Murakami
in his Curious Sights of Ezo Island
(1799). (HML)

gods in textile compositions was taboo.
Nonetheless, many anthropologists have
erroneously attempted to attach specific
totemic meanings to Ainu designs on gar¬
ments. For example, R. U. Sayce describes the
wavy or zigzag line designs as snakes, even in
the simplest or most conventionalized form
(1933: 23-24, 156). While snakes do play a

292

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

of fear, and asked me to burn it, saying it
would bring him bad luck, and he should
die (Bird 1881: 109).
Another interesting theory holds that
because the Ainu greatly respected and
revered all of nature—not just animals, but
such inanimate elements as thunder, wind,
rain, or snow as well—the creative, person¬
alized designs were also revered. The late
Ainu cultural leader Tasuke Yamamoto
believed that Ainu women were given by
spirits a special consciousness of the natural
environment which allowed them to create
designs of nature (Yotsuji 1981: 228-29).
The Ainu themselves have also investi¬
gated the meaning of these designs,- for

42.8

Knife and Sheath

The small multipurpose knife (makiri)
was a man's most indispensable
implement. It was used to make such
sacred objects as inaw (a wooden
staff with tufted shavings) and

ikupasuy (prayer stick), as well as
hunting weapons and domestic uten¬
sils. The first estimation of a man's
worth was made by a quick glance at
his knife sheath, makiri handle, and
tobacco case. This knife was obtained
from the Ainu at the Louisiana Pur¬
chase Centennial Exposition in St.
Louis in 1904. (AMNH 70-0002A/B)

back prevented evil spirits from entering a
person. Examples of this meaning of sermak
permeated Ainu life: Ainu men wore their
swords hanging from their backs, whereas the
Japanese wore swords at their sides. When
Ainu men prayed, they sprinkled sake over
instance, the Ainu cultural leader Shigeru

their heads and shoulders with the prayer

Kayano (1978: 59-60) has stated that the

stick, ikupasuy, which showed respect to their

idea of designs in general was derived from

guardian spirits,- in addition, as an Ainu went

the concept of warding off evil. Traditionally

out of the house, the hosts would often say

women embroidered a simple "rope” around

"sermaka-omare," which meant "put something

the neck, front openings, sleeves, and hem on

on your back." When one Ainu met another,

the earliest garments to keep evil spirits from

they greeted each other by touching the head

entering the body. The original rope designs

and shoulders, which also showed respect to

were nothing more than a solid color, usually

their guardian spirits.

dark blue, which probably originated from a

Ainu embroidery likewise seems to have

real-life practice: an Ainu mother working in

had a prophylactic function. When an Ainu

the mountains or fields with her baby would

woman left the house, she put on an embroi¬

encircle the infant with a rope to protect it

dered garment so that the guardian spirits of

while it slept. Any evil spirits in the area

these items would protect her from harm

would not be able to enter inside the rope to

(Chiri 1973a: 1 34-36). One of the oldest

harm the baby (Kayano 1978: 59-60,-

known Ainu garments is from the Kuriles,- it is

interview, Oct. 1984).

made of puffin feathers and is owned by the

The design patterns are also likely

Hokkaido University Ainu Museum in

related to the highly important concept of

Sapporo. While it has often been treated as a

sermak, which links the original meaning of the

curiosity, this garment may be a very impor¬

Ainu word sermak, meaning "back" or

tant forerunner of Ainu design It is made of

"shadow," to the belief that protecting the

three white birdskins with sexual organs
attached, and there are red embroidered
"webs" on the back of the garment. The

42.9

Kurile Ainu called the upper area of the back

Bone Carving

This small ivory carving in the shape

eyamatau. From the meaning of eyam, "take

of a whale tail is engraved with typical

good care of," and atau, "a place where a thing

Ainu whorl designs, but the collection

is kept," the compound can be translated as "a

records regarding its provenance are
ambiguous: “Ainu Siberia Gilyaks

place where a thing that is taken good care of

Sakhalin." It was collected by Otto

is kept." It is therefore an important place on

Esche before 1874, from Sakhalin. Its

the body,- because this design appears on the

function is unknown, but its small

back of this early garment and the upper back

size, ornamental quality, and the

area is often richly embroidered in other

presence of a hook indicate that it

garments, it is likely that these designs were

may have served as a chest ornament

intended to protect this special place.

or necklace pendant. (PEM E1990)

42/ BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

293

Other Ainu scholars have pointed to a
similarity in style rather than function as the
unifying element in Ainu design: Kindaichi and
Sugiyama stated (1942: 18-19) that the basic
element of Ainu design was the morew, which
means "turn gracefully" in the Ainu language,this is now commonly known as a curvilinear
design (figs. 42.6, 42.9). Kayano supports the
contention that this pattern, morew-noka, simply
means "a shape or motif that turns gracefully"
and does not have any other meaning (1978:
58-60). However, it is generally agreed that the
use of curvilinear design in the unique Ainu
tattoos on the back of women's hands and
around their arms was intended to protect them
from evil spirits (fig. 42.7). The tattoo design
was also a sign of maturity and recognized as
such among adults.
One concept that is found repeatedly in
the literature, espoused by many Ainu scholars,
is that Ainu garment designs are always sym¬
metrical. While there is no doubt that most
often symmetry was attempted, I have seen
dozens of garments with asymmetrical designs.
Some differences are to be expected on hand¬
made objects, such as random width and fluctua¬
tion in the length of line or differences in the
amount of negative or positive space surround¬
ing patterns. Other garments, however, are very
obviously asymmetrical. For example, in one

42.11

book on Ainu garments, Ainu no mon'yo by Ichiro
Yotsuji (1981), there are at least twelve examples
42.11 Three Inaw
Inaw are sacred shaved sticks that
symbolize birds, which accompany a
man's prayers to the god world. Willow
branches were gathered a week (and
sometimes as early as a month) be¬
fore a ceremony; the bark was then
peeled and the wood was dried for
several days. The sticks were carved
into a wide variety of beautiful shapes,
each intended for a specific god or
function. (ACM)

42.10 Ikupasuy
Prayer sticks, known to Ainu as

ikupasuy. are the vehicle through which
men communicate with the gods. The
carving on the ikupasuy also identified
the worshiper. Often misidentified in
early literature as a “mustache stick’’
or "mustache lifter,” the ikupasuy
carried a man's prayers to the gods. Its
artful and creative manufacture was a
major concern; hours of thought and
energy went into making one. (BMA)

42.10

294

42.13

Flower Arrow

Blunt arrows with tips carved to
resemble partially opened flowers

(heper-ay) were used in the

of asymmetrical designs that range from the

centered on woodworking. They had at least

subtle to the overt In almost all cases the differ¬

three intentions: to carve with a singular and

ences are found in the bottom half of the gar¬

absolute spiritual purpose,- to combine

ment, from the waist down. In five cases the

spiritual and artistic purpose in their cre¬

crest of the owner, these arrows

asymmetry is apparent on both the front and

ations,- to embrace the dual intent of utility

identified the ceremony's sponsor. In

back, while on the remaining seven it is found

and beauty. The seemingly endless number of

some areas, red cloth covered the

only on the back. These are genuine composi¬

carvings executed by the Ainu men through¬

tional differences, although some are not obvi¬

out their lives all have intricate designs and

iyomante. Carved with the family

tip of the arrowhead. Heper-ay were
shot at the bear but caused it no
harm: their purpose was to excite
the animal in preparation for its
journey to god land. (MPM N17284C)

ous due in part to an "orderly confusion" of

beauty of form. Some were created in

design. Unfortunately, limited experience in the

accordance with religious beliefs, some

past led researchers to believe that the examples

because of personal ego, and others through

of symmetrical designs they encountered were

household necessity. There are only a few

representative of all Ainu designs, and over time

rare examples of toys or other objects carved

this became dogma.

with the intent of being simply a plaything.

While controversy over the exact

Because until the twentieth century most

meaning of the designs in Ainu garments or

Ainu men did not have the same definition of

A man’s ceremonial costume included

the relative importance of the unifying

"art" as the western world, the Ainu men

a special headdress called a

elements continues, it is certain that the skills

treated wood with respect, as a living thing from

sapaunpe, which was woven from

of Ainu women as makers of these beautiful

prehistoric times. They believed that if you

and unique objects has long been valued.

carved an object with devotion, it would have a

42.12 Ceremonial Headdress

grapevines and other materials. It was
common to mount small carvings of

spirit of its own. To show their reverence

bears, wolves, or other animals at the
front of the headdress, and flaps of
colored silk were sometimes attached

Ainu Men as Wood Carvers of

toward these wooden artifacts, when they were
worn out or broken the Ainu usually performed

Art and Artifact

to the sides to show wealth. This
specimen was collected by Stewart

As with women, Ainu men's creative energy

Culin for the Brooklyn Museum in

seems to have been culturally directed into

1912. (BMA 12.574)

very narrow areas of expression but was

a simple ceremony to send the spirit of the
wood to god land (see Utagawa, this volume).

The Traditional Ainu Carving Tool:
The Makiri
Ainu men have taken great pride in creating a
variety of carvings using only a knife called a
makiri (fig. 42.8), which was used not only for
carving household goods for daily life but
also for creating ceremonial objects. This
same tool was used for cutting and skinning
game and was essential for a variety of other
uses. An Ainu boy learned to master the makiri
by watching his father or grandfather from an
early age.
Ainu men always wore the makiri at their
sides, usually encased in an intricately cawed
wooden sheath. The design on a sheath and
hilt was cawed with devotion by Ainu men,
whose carving skill was judged by the quality
of both design and technique found thereon.
When he had mastered the skills needed to
use the makiri, a man was considered to be an
independent cawer as well as an adult in the
community. Displaying the makiri was a
statement of a rite of passage.

42/ BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

295

The Ainu woman also had her own

Even though the ikupasuy presents a

makiri for cutting cloth or skinning a hide, and

limited area for carving, the Ainu employed

this was called menoko-makiri, or woman's knife.

an aggressive and creative approach to this

When a young man was interested in a young

space. Low- and high-relief designs ranging

woman for marriage, he carved a beautiful

from very complex to quite simple are

menoko-makiri and gave it to her. If she accepted

juxtaposed, but the compositions never seem

it and wore it at her side, she had tacitly

busy. The integration of the prayer stick's

accepted his proposal (Kayano 1978: 28).

religious symbolism and its artistic design are
complementary.

The Prayer Stick: Ikupasuy

In their depiction of religious symbol¬

The most important article of spiritual and

ism, however, the ikupasuy represent a

artistic carving was the ikupasuy or prayer

dramatic and interesting departure from

stick (fig. 42.10). Normally twelve to sixteen

anything else in the Ainu artistic repertoire.

inches (thirty to forty centimeters) long and

Although living organisms, including both

two to four inches (five to ten centimeters)

people and animals, were almost never used in

wide, it usually has rounded edges and is

designs for fear of angering the god spirits as

tapered at one end. They were made from

discussed relative to Ainu women's art, the

yew, willow, or spindle trees and were carved

ikupasuy was one of the few exceptions to this

in a somewhat flattened shape (see Maraini,

cultural dogma. In this format the Ainu have

this volume).

made countless artistic renderings of their
personal spirit totems, representations that
range from exact realism to the most abstract
forms. Examples of totemic figures include
bears, killer whales, seals, fish such as salmon
and swordfish, birds such as albatross and
ducks, snakes, and flowers,- objects made by
humans also appear, especially boats.

Ceremonial Carvings: Inaw
Inaw are carvings of up to seventeen inches
(forty-five centimeters) in length, although
some up to eight feet (2.5 meters) or longer are
known. They were made from a simple,
straight tree limb that was finely shaved and
tufted at one end. Although the original defini¬
tion of inaw has been lost (if there was one),
42.14

Sword Holder

it was—and is—one of the most meaningful

A man's sword (emush) and sword

artifacts in the Ainu religion (fig. 42.1 I) be¬

holder (emushat) were among his

cause it acts as a messenger to the gods. Aside

most important treasures, and Ainu
women took took great pride in the

from their spiritual use, inaw have a sublime

manufacture of the woven holder

beauty unusual in traditional Ainu art, which is

and strap. (N. Tsuda Collection)

more often characterized by visual excitement.
Many different types of inaw were
carved depending on the type of ceremony,
local region, and ranking of the god who was
the object of the prayers. The inaw was used
only for a specific ceremony or function and
was never reused (Fujimura 1982: 76-77).
It has been estimated that several hundred
different kinds of inaw were found throughout
the Ainu regions (H. Kono 1933b).
The Ainu carved inaw from different
types of trees depending on the purpose of
the ceremony in which they were used. For
the "good gods,'' who brought prosperity, the
most common materials were willow and

296

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

42.15

Smoking Kit

A man's smoking kit consisted of a
tobacco box, a pipe holder, and a
pipe. The tobacco box and pipe
holder were attached to each other
with an adjustable cord regulated with

decay, except

a cowrie shell: these small shiny

for the inaw for the

shells from marine snails were once

fire god, which was

used as currency in China. This kit is

burned after a single use

quite different from most tradi¬

(Takakura 1970a: 634-45).

tional ones and takes a more
modern form—it has bronze
pipe fittings and a simplified

Men's Ceremonial Headdresses:

tobacco box. This piece was

Sapaunpe

collected by Hiram Hiller

Another exception to the rule that human

in 1901. (UPM A458)

and animal forms be intentionally avoided
dogwood because the
grain is fine, the color is
white, and the wood is easy to
carve. There is a myth that describes
how the Ainu began creating inaw-.
A long, long time ago, the creation god
came down to the human land (Ainu mosir)

in design elements (except for ikupasuy)
is men's ceremonial headdresses, sapaunpe,
which usually have carved totem animals
such as bears, killer whales, wolves, or owls
attached to the front (fig. 42.12). The
headdress is usually made from the woven
bark of young tree saplings or from grape¬

from the god land (kamuy mosir) in order to

vine. These ceremonial headdresses were

create a country. After the god created it,

worn by male participants during the bear¬

he had to go back to the god land, but he

sending ceremony (iyomante) (see Akino,

couldn't bring the things he used in the

Kodama, this volume).

human's land. One of these objects was the
chopsticks he had used at meals, so he put
them in the ground and left them. Soon
roots came out of the chopsticks and they
became a willow tree. The Ainu knew it

Ceremonial Flower Arrows: Heper-ay
Special arrows (heper-ay) were carved to
shoot the bear during the iyomante ceremony

was a god tree, and they decided to carve

(fig. 42.13). The conical arrowhead, about

the inaw from that tree. And then they

half an inch (1.25 centimeters) in diameter

began to offer inaw to the gods (Kayano

with the actual point less than a quarter of an

1978: 283).

inch (0.5 centimeters) in diameter and about

In ritual ceremonies men set several inaw

one inch (three to four centimeters) long,

in front of their altar (nusa) and dipped an

was darkened with black charcoal and then

ikupasuy in sacred sake, which was then

beautifully carved with the creator's ancestral

sprinkled over the inaw as they prayed The

design (itokpa). The tip of the arrowhead was

Ainu believe that the inaw turns into a bird

shaved to resemble the petals of a partly

after receiving a message (kindaichi and

opened flower, then a small piece of red

Sugiyama 1942: 3-4).

cloth was fit over the arrowhead and affixed

In the traditional Ainu home a variety

with more shavings. A shaft about ten to

of inaw were placed around the interior of the

eleven inches (twenty-five to thirty centime¬

house. The inaw for the god of fire was placed

ters) long was inserted in the arrowhead.

in the fire pit and an inaw for the home treasure

The Ainu believed that shooting these

was placed in the northeast corner of the

arrows at the bear let the bear god play just

house. At the so-called "god window" on the

before the bear was put to death. They shot

east side of the home another type of inaw was

the "harmless” beper-ay arrows at the bear

placed. These offerings to different gods stayed

to give it a shock, and when the bear became

where they were placed until they fell into

wild after being hit by the arrows they

4 2/ BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

297

42.16, 42.17

Platter and Spatula

Ainu whori designs are carved in
the center of this beautiful old
platter, which was collected for the
Golden Gate International Exposi¬
tion in 1939, as indicated by the
U.S. Customs label still affixed to
it. The fine cooking spatula was

42.16

used to stir and cut dumplings
before its collection by Stewart
Culin in 1912. (BMS C13464;
BMA 12.678)

believed that it was expressing its joy about

Japanese medicine case (inro). While it is

returning to god land. The number of arrows

possible that pipe smoking was introduced by

used was determined by the age of the bear.

maritime traders, it is more likely that the

The leader of the family that sponsored the

Ainu adopted pipe smoking from their

ceremony was honored by shooting the first

Chinese trading partners. The pipe was made

arrow, which was incised with their itokpa to

from hardwood, and its stem was as long as

let the god know who had staged this event.

fifteen inches (forty centimeters). Although
pipe holders are similar in shape to ikupasuy,

SWORDS: EmUSH

they have one hole near the end in which

Another artifact that Ainu men particularly

to put a pipe head and their designs never

valued was the sword (emusb), which was

included any animals or other significant

acquired by trade with the Japanese. Unlike

depictions found on the prayer sticks. Pipe

the Japanese, they did not use swords as

holders instead are carved with delicate

weapons but only as part of a ceremonial

curvilinear or geometric designs.

outfit and as symbols of wealth. During the

Like the makiri Ainu men customarily

bear-sending ceremony the Ainu men danced

wore at their sides, smoking implements

with these swords, which were also used in

were displayed and carried in a similar fashion

rituals for warding off evil spirits (fnukai 1970:

(see illustration on p. 286). An old custom

629-31). Ainu men also personalized these

called "pipe exchange" demonstrates their use

items by carving intricate designs on the

in daily life: as a friendly gesture to a person

sword's wooden scabbard, which hung through

he had met for the first time, an Ainu man

a woven sword holder (emushat, fig. 42.14)—

filled his pipe with tobacco and offered it to

made by an Ainu woman—from their right

the other man to smoke. His gesture would

shoulder to their left hip with the sword

be reciprocated (Kayano 1978: 246), and in

resting on the back (see Siddle, this volume).

the process of exchanging their tobacco

Tobacco Box and Pipe Holder:

levels and skills.

pipes each examined the other's carving

Tanpakuop,■ Tobacco Pipe: Kiseri

298

Another important carved item was a set of

Utilitarian Artifacts

smoking implements (fig. 42.15), which

Ainu men also carved such household objects

consisted of a tobacco box and pipe holder

as bowls, trays, ladles, and spatulas (figs.

(tanpakuop) and tobacco pipe (kiseri). The

42.16-42.20). Much of this type of carving is

hexagonal or octangular shapes of the

plain and simple, which emphasizes the

tobacco boxes are similar to those of the

natural beauty of the wood; however, like

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUiL

42.18

Bowl

This wooden bowl has heartshaped flower designs carved on
each side of it, with a fish-scale
background design filling in the
area between design elements.
Although the overall design is
Ainu, use of a heart motif is not
typical and may indicate that the
piece was commissioned for
sale. (PEM E7909)

42.19

Plate

Ainu wooden bowls and plates are
found in a variety of shapes. Small
plates were normally used to serve

42.18

food, while large platters were used
for such purposes as kneading
dough, washing food, or as cooking
utensils. Many elaborately carved
platters were made for sale or trade
(NMNH 324509)

carved artifacts from other native cultures,
such as those found on Canada's Northwest
Coast, many of these utilitarian objects are
beautifully carved with extremely intricate
design elements similar in complexity to
those created by women for garments. For
example, Ainu women kept their sewing
needles in a small tube called a chispo, which
was made of wood or bone and hung around
the neck (fig. 42.2 1). Because needles were
very difficult to acquire until the modern era
and were extremely valuable items to Ainu
women, Ainu men carved curvilinear designs
on these needlecases, very much like those
applied by women to garments. Through use
and age many very old utilitarian objects
have developed a deep and beautiful patina.
42.19

Conclusion
Whether manifested as incredible carvings
or beautiful textiles, the creativity cultivated
42.20

Eating Utensil

by the Ainu produced some of the most

Small flat wooden spatulas were
used as eating utensils by children

impressive art of any indigenous people, and

or older people; adults also used

the important knowledge needed to continue

them when they ate porridge made

these traditions has not been lost. While

of lily roots. Most early pieces, like
this one collected by Benjamin
Smith Lyman in 1876, had intricate
carved designs. (NMNH E022269)

42 / BEGINNINGS OF AINU

ART

299

anthropologists record these artifacts in terms

Nibutani area there has been a rule relating to

Ainu women kept their sewing needles

of materials, scale, function, and so on, sadly

the carving of these patterns for at least the

in smail, beautifully decorated wood,

some of the most important information —

last hundred years. When fish-scale patterns

42.21

Needlecase

bone, or ivory tubular needlecases

such as the artist's identity—often was not

are carved on an ikupasuy, the stroke of the

necks. Needles were stored on a

recorded. Because of incomplete collection

knife is worked away from the body, but

cloth strap that could be pulled out of

(chispo) that they hung around their

notes, it would be extremely difficult—if

when the patterns are carved on a tray or

the case. Because steel needles were

not impossible—to track characteristic

spatula, the knife is worked towards the body.

expensive and difficult to obtain even

carving styles and distinctive designs to

Although the original reason and meaning for

individual artists. Today, however, many

this practice has been lost over time, these

modern Ainu textile artists are able to visit

rules are still followed today.

as late as the early nineteenth cen¬
tury, they were extremely important
items for Ainu women. Needlecases

There is no doubt that Ainu traditional

similar to this in form and decoration

museums with Ainu collections in order to

were used by other native peoples of

examine the techniques used to create these

art is experiencing a revitalization like that

the North Pacific Rim, including the

extraordinary garments, and they use this

experienced by the North American Indians.

Koryak, Chukchi, and Yup’ik Eskimos

knowledge to produce contemporary

While Ainu traditional art does not have the

examples. Ainu men continue to create

worldwide recognition of Native American

traditional wooden objects, especially the

art or command such high prices in the mar¬

attached to the end of the strap.

sacred ikupasuy, which are still used in

ketplace, things are changing. The most

(Shin Mouri Collection)

ceremonies, and the inaw, which are still

important instrument of change is the Ainu

placed around the modern Ainu home. Ainu

Shinpo (see Dietz and Tsunemoto, this vol¬

men also continue to practice traditional

ume), a law enacted by the Japanese Diet in

carving techniques. Many carving designs

1997 that essentially recognizes the unique¬

of Alaska. This case was collected in
Hokkaido between 1909 and 1929 by
Soshichiro Mouri; a Chinese coin is

300

are dominated by curvilinear elements in the

ness of Ainu culture and provides funding to

center of the object and delicate fish-scale

protect, preserve, and promote traditional art

and/or crosshatching patterns artfully

for generations to come. While the Ainu have

executed around them, and Ainu cultural

no word for art, there is a word they use to

leader Kayano states (1978: 217) that in the

describe it: pirika means beautiful, and it is.

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

F
43 /Saranip
and Tenki:
Ainu Basketry and
North Pacific
Affinities
Nelson Graburn
and Molly Lee

43.1

or almost a century, investigators

One cultural domain in which these

who have studied the basketry of the

shared similarities are evident is in the coiled

the Northern Pacific have noted simi¬

and twined basketry traditions of the Ainu

larities between the basketry of Alaska

and other cultures of the North Pacific Rim.

and Siberia (e.g., Jochelson 1908: 631-32),

This study provides an historical overview of

but to date equally apparent resemblances

Ainu basketry, describes Ainu basket types,

between Siberian baskets and those of the

and then considers these types in relation to

neighboring Ainu have rarely been explored

basketry of Siberia and Alaska.

(Montandon 1937: 107). The reason for this
oversight is simple: the Ainu are concen¬

Historic-Period Ainu Basketry

trated in Hokkaido, the northernmost island

The antiquity of woven basketry among the

of Japan,- thus, investigators tend to stress

Ainu is difficult to determine. For one thing,

the relationships between Ainu and Japa¬

information about the material culture of the

nese material culture, overlooking cultural

various Ainu subgroups is uneven. In addition,

elements stemming from their close prox¬

changes in territory and ethnonyms (names

imity and cultural ties to Siberia and the

given by ethnic groups) add confusion. At

North Pacific.

one time the Ainu appear to have occupied

Twined Basket

Basketry traditions around the globe
have ancient roots and are often
indicators of cultural contact and
change. Ainu basketry has interested
anthropologists because of its
similarity with that of other North
Pacific cultures. Twined-grass
baskets like this saranip with a
braided rim are nearly identical to
baskets made by Yup'ik Eskimos in
southwestern Alaska, but whether
this is due to ancient connections,
recent contact, or chance remains a
mystery. (PMC 64026)

43/AINU

BASKETRY TRADITION

301

territory stretching north from Honshu to
southern Sakhalin and the Kuriles. Archaeo¬
logical evidence and early historical sources,
such as the eighth-century Kojiki (Record of
Ancient Matters) (a.D. 701), place peoples
presumed to have been the ancestors of the
Ainu in northern Honshu. These people,
whom the Japanese called Emishi (barbarians),
most probably made the Neolithic pottery
figurines that exhibit tattoo patterns and show
clothing similar to those of the historic Ainu of
Hokkaido. Eventually the Japanese pushed them
north onto Hokkaido (Sansom 1958-63: 1:91,
104,- Sjpberg 1993: 1, 109).
Even after their expulsion from Honshu,
however, the Ainu were by no means isolated.
On Sakhalin they had inter-Ainu trading
networks and tributary trade with China and
the nearby peoples of the Amur River basin
(Stephan 1971: 23-25). Rinzo Mamiya, who
visited Sakhalin in 1808-1809, reported
(1 855) that they used manufactured Chinese
goods gained in their tributary trade with the
Manchu dynasty to trade with Japanese
merchants, who then traded these goods in
Edo (Tokyo) for large profits. At about the
same time, the Kurile Ainu were acquiring
foreign goods from the encroaching trade
networks ot Russia and Japan (Krasheninnikov
1776: 63,-Stephan 1974: 52-54,- Torii 1919:
1 32-35). Finally, in 1945 the Russians drove
the Sakhalin Ainu out of Japanese-controlled
southern Sakhalin and later that year expelled
them from the Kuriles. Both groups resettled
in Hokkaido, where Japan's political and

43.2, 43.3

Saranip

Ainu women gathered wild vegetables,
nuts, and edible roots, which they
carried and stored in twined baskets
called saranip. Fiber from the inner bark
of the elm tree—the same material
used to weave traditional Ainu cloth
(attush)—was also used for weaving
baskets and produced a tough, durable
product. Japanese linden bark, which
had a whiter fiber, was also used.

Saranip ranged in size from small utility
bags to large storage containers like the
one seen in this nineteenth-century

Ainu-e painting. This bag was collected
in Penkatori. Hokkaido, in 1951. (AMNH
70-2/932; BMV)

43.3

302

LIVING ARTS / N. GRAB URN

AND

M .

LEE

cultural policies forced them to assimilate,

accounts of Ainu basketry. Only Kayano

much as they had forced the Hokkaido Ainu

(1978: 131) points to the spiritual importance

in the nineteenth century.

of basketry as sentient beings with souls that

Ainu basketry is first mentioned in the

could punish or reward humans according to

eighteenth-century literature, but whether it

the treatment they received,- he also notes that

was known earlier is unclear. The archaeologi¬

some baskets look like ghosts and are jokingly

cal record indicates that predecessors of the

referred to as such.

Ainu (jomon) in northern Honshu and Hok¬
kaido as well as Sakhalin and the Kuriles made

Basketry Types and Distribution

a type of pottery similar to the Japanese

Ainu basketry consists of two main types:

43.4 Ainu Folk Crafts

(Takakura I960: 22,• Torii 1919: 187-99, 277-

twined-basketry bags and coiled baskets.

Twined saranip baskets are the oldest

79), but no basketry is reported, either because

A third category includes a few types typical

it was unknown or because its cellulose fibers

of Japanese basketry, which were probably

territory. This illustration comes from

did not survive under archaeological condi¬

made by both Ainu and Japanese (with the

the 1978 book Ainu no mingu (Ainu

tions. At least by the eighteenth century, how¬

latter examples misattributed to the Ainu).

folk crafts), which was written by

ever, Ainu culture shared less with the Japanese

Because these descriptions are based on the

Shigeru Kayano to document and
preserve disappearing Ainu traditions.

than it did with the Amur River and

literature and published illustrations from

and most widespread of Ainu basketry
types and are found throughout Ainu

Kamchatka peoples. The use of basketry may

museum collections rather than examina¬

written by a member of an indigenous

have arisen through these contacts, but it is

tion of a sufficiently representative sample,

population, this book is a primary

unlikely that it was introduced as a substitute

the types described here must be consid¬

source on Ainu material culture.

for pottery, which was displaced by imported

ered provisional.

One of the first such works to be

43.5

43.4

43.5 Archival Documentation

iron and lacquerware during that century

Twined-Basketry Bags

A description of Ainu basketry was first

(Sjqberg 1993: 100-102,-Torii 1919: 188).

The most widespread type of Ainu basket is

found in notes written by Shimanojo
Murakami (also known as Mochimaro
Hata) about his 1798 expedition to

Most recently published catalogues of
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Ainu

the soft, utilitarian storage or carrying bag
made in several variations of twining (figs.

Hokkaido and the Kuriles. His detailed

material culture include examples of basketry

43.1-43.4). There are many variations of the

comments and drawings, which

(e.g., Tokyo Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan 1992,-

basic technique, but the Ainu seem to use

provide information about materials

Kokuritsu Minzokugaku Hakubutsukan 1993,-

mainly plain or open-twining with some cross¬

used and construction techniques,

Kotani 1993b,- Kotani and Kreiner 1993;

warp twining for decorative effects (Mason

were compiled in Ezo-shima kikan
(Curious Sights of Ezo Island). (TNM)

Kokuritsu Minzogaku Hakubutsukan 1991),

1970: 232-34). Most of these baskets are

though it is overlooked in most ethnographies

finished with a border made by separating

(e.g., Ohnuki-Tierney 1974,- Ohtsuka 1993;

the weft strands into groups of four or five

ST.cn berg 1933). Of the ethnographers,

and braiding these up a few inches, then

Shimanojo Murakami, also known as

fastening the ends of the braids together with

Mochimaro Hata (Ezo-shima kikan, cited in

a braided border, creating the same effect as

Tanisawa and Sasaki 1982), Shigeru Kayano

eyelet embroidery. The spaces between the

(1978), George Montandon (1937), and

gathered and braided weft strands form loops

Rinzo Torii (1919) offer detailed field-based

through which a braided cord is run for use

43/AINU

BASKETRY TRADITION

303

of a Tenki [a general Ainu term for grass basket]
made of morochi [Ainu for beach grass], found
in big and small sizes in Shikotan and Etoro
[two Kurile islands]. Female Ainu make these
beautiful and elaborate crafts that should
be cherished" (Ezo-shima kikan in Tanisawa and
Sasaki 1982: 170). According to Murakami,
morochi (also called kina by the Ainu) also grew
along the Hokkaido shoreline (the name
"Hokkaido” included Sakhalin and the Kuriles
at that time). Nonetheless, the Hokkaido
examples, which comprise the majority in
museum collections, mainly use the scraped
bast, or inner bark, of trees such as the
mountain elm (lllmtts montana var. lacinata),
Japanese linden (Tilia ulmijolia var. Japonica), or
wild grapevine (Vitis coignetiae) (Tokyo
Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan 1992: 44, no. 1215—
27,- Kreiner and Olschleger 1987: 63-64, pi.
56, 57,- Kokuritsu Minzogaku Hakubutsukan
1991: 167). Other fibers include rush (Juncus
effusus var. decipiens), the kind used for the
ubiquitous tatami mats in Japan, and reed
(Kokuritsu Minzokugaku Hakubutsukan 1993:
103, 1 17, 125-27).
According to Murakami and others, the
as a drawstring or tumpline (Mason 1970:

plant variously called morochi and kina was

Tenki, baskets of coiled grass, are found

263). Some basketry bags are decorated with

also called tenkiso or tenkikusa by the Ainu,- -so

primarily in the Kuriles (and to a lesser

a few rows of cross-warp twining. Twined-

and -kusa are alternative readings of the

basketry bags vary in size from about twelve

Japanese character for grass. These terms

to twenty-four inches in height.

translate into Japanese as hamaninniku

43.6 Coiled-Grass Basket

extent in Hokkaido) and seem to be a
more recent addition to Ainu culture.
They are made by building up a spiral coil
of bundled grass stems and then sewing

These twined-basketry bags, known in

each coil to the coil below; this gives the

Ainu as saranip (Kotani 1993b: 96, 108, 125,-

basket a rigid body, making it suitable for
use as a storage container. Most Ainu
examples are small and have lids. This

(literally, "beach garlic," called "beach grass"
in English). It will be helpful to note the

Kreinerand Olschleger 1987: 59-61), are

probable meanings of these overlapping

the earliest and most widely reported of

terms. Whereas morochikina seems to be the
Ainu name for the whole beach garlic plant

tenki, which was collected by Alexander

Ainu basketry types (Kayano 1978: 128-31,-

Agassiz from Shikotan Island in the

Montandon 1937: 96). Examples from all

(also used as a medicine by the Ainu), the

Kuriles before 1893, is made with an

three Ainu areas are represented in collections,

Ainu term tenki was probably reserved for the

although most are from Hokkaido. These

dried stems and blades that were used for

utilitarian baskets were made by Ainu women,

making baskets (Tanisawa and Sasaki 1982:

overlapping stitch that gives it a rough
appearance. (PMC 51630)

who used them for carrying and storage of

222, fn. 12). Alternatively, Hata implies that

household commodities (fig. 43.3), especially

Ainu tenki was used to mean the basket itself,-

for "gathering wild lily bulbs and other wild

from this we can infer that Ainu tenki-kusa/so

vegetables" (kokuritsu Minzogaku

means "basket-grass."

Hakubutsukan 1991: 167).

Saranip are the only kind of basket

The materials Ainu used for twined-

304

described in the early accounts from all Ainu

basketry bags vary. According to Saito (1995)

areas and, not surprisingly, are the most

the most common was beach grass (Elymus

common type found in Ainu collections

mollis,- see M. Okada 1988). On his 1798

(e g., Kotani 1993b,- Kreiner and Olschleger

expedition to Ainu territory Murakami

1987: 59-61,- Kokuritsu Minzogaku

collected a Kurile Ainu twined-basketry bag

Hakubutsukan 1991: 167: 10-1 1). Of par¬

(fig. 43.5), which is illustrated as Figure 3 in

ticular note is Murakami's 1798 description

his account of his travels (Ezo-shima kikan cited

of Hokkaido (Yezo) basketry (Tanisawa and

in Tanisawa and Sasaki 1982,- Sansom 1958-

Sasaki 1982) and that of by Rinzo Mamiya

63: 3: 176, I 81). The caption contains useful

(I 855) from Sakhalin. Later in his account

information about basketry materials: "Picture

Murakami related that when he returned to

LIVING ARTS / N. CRABURN

AND

M.

LEE

basketry bags. Nevertheless, these items are
significant enough to warrant attention. The
baskets are made from beach grass by a
technique known as bundle coiling (Mason
1970: 248). Two variants of bundle coiling
are found among the Ainu. Kurile Ainu
examples have overlapping stitches placed
tightly side-by-side (fig. 43.6), and some
Hokkaido Ainu baskets are similarly made.
One Hokkaido example (Montandon 1937:
96e), however, has stitches placed half an
inch apart, giving it a rough, unfinished
appearance. Ainu grass baskets are smaller
in size than the basketry bags, averaging
about two inches (5.5 centimeters) in diam¬
eter and four inches (ten centimeters)
in height. Some coiled ware is decorated by
substituting darker-dyed materials for the
shiny, yellowish, dried beach grass. Ainu
coiled baskets usually have well-fitted lids,
and these sometimes have pulls of braided
straw or other material (fig. 43.7). No func¬
tion is recorded for the Ainu coiled baskets,
but their size as well as their mass-produced
look suggests that they were probably made
as trade items rather than for indigenous
43.8 Twineo Yup’ik Basket

Hakodate (southern Hokkaido) "on August

purposes,- given the Kurile Ainu's proximity

Connections between Ainu basketry

5th [he] met an official and gave him a

to Kamchatka, where coiled baskets seem to

present of a tenki amikago [woven-grass basket]

have been made for the marketplace, this

from Tokachi" (Tanisawa and Sasaki 1982:

seems probable.

traditions and those of other North
Pacific cultures seem likely because
of similarities in construction and the
nearly identical method of gathering

253). This is perhaps the first historical ac¬

the warp remainders into a braided

count of Ainu basketry assuming the role of

made in the Kuriles (Torii 1919: 184, fig.

rim, as seen here. Both types appear

tourist art (Low 1976,- Sjpberg 1993: 162,

52), although a few references to grass bas¬

very early in their respective cultures,

167, fig. 14).

ketry are found in more recent ethnographies

so the question of their origin and

Most bundle-coiled grass baskets were

of the Hokkaido Ainu (Kreiner 1993: 29, pi.

relationship will have to be pursued

5,- Montandon 1937: 103-107,- Kotani

through archaeological studies.

Coiled Basketry

(UAFM 554-544G)

The number of Ainu coiled baskets (tenki)

1993b: 78). The Japanese also made coiled

found in museum collections around the

baskets for various purposes (Softie et al.

world is smaller than that of the twined-

1976), but they are usually made in a differ¬
ent coiling technique called two-rod coiling
(Mason 1970: 251) or amikomu ("woven alter¬

43.7

Decorated Tenki

nately") in Japanese (Miyazaki 1985: 4.2b-e),-

Ainu, like the Koryak and

thus, it is more likely that coiling spread

Itel'men peoples of Kamchatka,

southward from the Kuriles than that it was

Yup'ik Eskimos of southwestern

borrowed from the Japanese (Koji Deriha,

Alaska, and Labrador Inuit,
decorated coiled-grass baskets

personal communication 1997). The Japanese

with a checkerwork of dyed grass

also made small, loosely bundled coiled bas¬

wrappings. This illustration of

kets for bird nests (Rossbach 1973: 106, pi.

such decoration on an Ainu

127), but these are not mentioned by Sofue

coiled basket derives from a

(Sofue et al. 1976: 194, pi

1919 book by Ryuzo Torii.

1). These re¬

semble the coiled basket from Hokkaido
illustrated by Montandon (1937: 96, pi. 26e).
Perhaps the more recent Montandon ex¬
ample, which differs from the bundle-coiled
Kurile Ainu coiled ware, was borrowed from
the Japanese.

43 / AINU

BASKETRY TRADITION

305

Ainu Baskets with

cally Japanese technique, but whether the

Japanese Prototypes

basket was copied from the Japanese or

A few examples of anomalous baskets, which

was Japanese-made is unknown,- in any case,

seem to be Japanese in origin, have been

lattice-caned baskets are not part of tradi¬

reported for the Ainu. By far the most widely

tional Ainu culture.

reported is the basket bag made of matting,
also called saranip. Kayano (1978: 204) uses

Regional Specificity

the Japanese term "jutsu," which means "ordi¬

There are still many unanswered questions

nary," to describe the loom-woven baskets in

about the distribution of Ainu basket types.

his text (as opposed to the twined type we

This is due in large part to the sketchy

have described above, which he calls by the

information in early accounts, inadequate

special term chie-oshke-saranip in Ainu). They

documentation of museum examples, and/or

are made like cjoza, the ordinary Japanese

historical circumstances, in particular the

mats, which are woven on a simple upright

forced removal of the Kurile and Sakhalin

loom. The loom, known for centuries in

groups and the question of which basketry

Japan, Korea, and China, has been in use in

traditions they brought with them and which

Hokkaido at least since the seventeenth cen¬

had been practiced in Hokkaido all along.
Descriptions of types, techniques, and

tury, and indeed, according to Kazuyoshi
Ohtsuka (personal communication 1998), the

functions of baskets in the nineteenth-century

stone weights used for looms, called pit

literature are minimal, but there are a number

in Ainu, have been excavated from pre-Ainu

of helpful illustrations of baskets in these

sites of the Satsumon period.

accounts. Illustrations of Ainu life, particularly

The warp of the mats is made of bul¬

early Ainu-e paintings, often include illustra¬

rushes and the weft of dried and twisted elm or

tions of baskets. For example, a catalogue

the inner bark of linden (Hilger 1971: 79).

from the Tokyo Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan

Once finished, the mat is sewn into a cylinder

(Tokyo National Museum of History) includes

to make the body of the basket bag, and the

two Ainu-e plates showing twined saranip

bottom is bent inward and secured to form the

(1993: 53, pi. 2a, b). Rinzo Torii (1919: fig. 53)

base. A traditional saranip border of braided

includes a photograph of two Ainu women

weft strands is then added to form the rim of

making baskets,- in the same photo is a man

the basket. Still found commonly in Hokkaido

making a house model, a commodity nor¬

Ainu households in the 1970s, the mat saranip

mally made only for outsiders, which sug¬

is used for carrying as well as for storage. Mat

gests that basketry, too, may have been made

saranip come in many sizes, from the small pon-

as souvenirs as well as for Ainu consump¬

saranip with a capacity of about two quarts (1.8

tion (Torii 1919: pi. VXII-C). Finally, a late-

liters) to the enormous totta, an approximately

nineteenth-century Japanese illustration of an

125-gallon (630 liters) storage basket (Hilger

Ainu house interior includes a twined basket

1971: 80,- Kayano 1978: 126-29).

with its characteristic rimloops (Tokyo

Another type of Ainu basket that may

The twined-basketry bag seems to have

be borrowed from the Japanese is made in
checkerwork, also called plaiting, which is the

been made in all three locations (Kreiner and

simplest form of weaving (fig. 43.7). A set of

Olschleger 1987: 59). Compared to baskets

warp strands is laid out horizontally and weft

from the Hokkaido and Kurile Ainu, however,

strands of the same dimensions are woven

examples from Sakhalin are rarely mentioned

in and out of the warps (Mason 1970: 223).

in the ethnographic literature and are sparsely

Checkerwork baskets, made in the regular

represented in museum collections. These

twined-basketry-bag shape (narrower at the

small numbers mirror the paucity of ethno¬

bottom) and also in a stiffer, square-shaped

graphic data from Sakhalin generally. One

variety (Kayano 1978: 126, 205), have been

possible explanation for the lack of artifacts is

published by twentieth-century ethnogra¬

that Sakhalin was the main conduit of trade

phers such as Montandon (1937: pi 26d, f).

between China and Japan, and thus the local

Like mat saranip, they may be a recent phe¬

Ainu had greater access to such imports as the

nomenon in Hokkaido. Montandon also

iron pots and lacquerware that replaced

illustrates a basket made in lattice caning

basketry and pottery in small-scale societies

(1937: 103, pi. 26f) that he found in two

across the world (Harrison 1954: 291).

Hokkaido villages. Lattice caning is a typi¬

30 6

Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan 1993: 9, pi. 9).

LIVING ARTS / N

GRAB URN

AND

M .

LEE

Of the few Sakhalin saranip that have

Twining
Wide distribution as well as archaeological
and historical evidence support the claim
that twined-basketry bags similar to the Ainu
saranip occur widely throughout the North

Pacific (Koya 1937,- Mason 1970: 397, pi.
138-40,- Montandon 1937: 107-1 10,- Popov
1954; Torii 1919: 77-89). Archaeologically,
shreds of twining have been excavated from
late prehistoric sites along the coast of the
Chukotka Peninsula (Sergei Arutiunov, per¬
sonal communication). In the Aleutian
Islands, excavations in the Kagamil caves
have yielded twined fragments, including at
least one open twined-grass carrying basket
(Dali 1878: pi. 7). Elsewhere in Alaska
twined ware is documented for the prehis¬
toric populations from Point Barrow to the
Alaska Peninsula (Giddings 1964: 70). Far¬
ther south, on the northern tip of the Olym¬
pic Peninsula, open-twined fragments dating
from circa A.D. 1350-1500 have been exca¬
vated at Ozette (Gleeson and Grosso 1976:
fig. 15). Even without evidence that twining
was used for basketry bags in all cases, this
widespread distribution certainly suggests
that its practitioners may have belonged to a
larger, culturally related group.
This evidence is bolstered by the
distribution of twined-basketry bags during
the historic period. Closed twined-basketry
bags of grass or woven nettle fiber are found
been reported (e.g., Kreiner 1993: 29), most

among the Ainu's closest Siberian neighbors,

Rita Pitka Blumenstein, a Yup'ik

appear to have been made of dried nettles

the Kamchadal (Itel'mens) and the Maritime

Eskimo artist, has been making

(Urtica takedana) rather than the grass com¬

Koryak (Jochelson 1908: 633-37, 708).

43.9

Modern Yup’ik Basket

coiled baskets since childhood. This
example shows Yup’ik-style
checkerwork decorations similar to

monly used as material in the Kuriles or

Braided borders are known for the Koryak

the elm and linden bark used in Hokkaido.

(Popov 1954: 117, pi. 24), though large soft

those found on Koryak, Itei'men,

It also may be that the Sakhalin Ainu used

bags of other types were equally common,

Labrador Inuit, and Ainu coiled

birch-bark baskets like those of the Nivkhi

especially close-twined bags decorated with

baskets. The fact that coil basketry

of northern Sakhalin. This is suggested by

allover geometric designs made by inserting

an illustration of two birch-bark specimens

darker-colored warp-strands (Jochelson

suggests that this tradition might

collected in Sakhalin at the turn of the

1908: 707).

have been introduced by Ainu

century (Kreiner and Olschleger 1987: 37,

contacts with peoples of Kamchatka,

fig. 22, 63-64, pi. 56-57).

appears to be only a few hundred
years old in the Kuriles and Hokkaido

possibly with the assistance of early

The most striking similarities to the
Ainu saranip, however, are found on the
opposite side of Bering Strait, among the

explorers and whalers active in these

Ainu and North Pacific Traditions

Aleuts and the Central Yup'ik (Eskimos)

nineteenth centuries. (R. Blumenstein

The foregoing described several types of

of the Bering Sea (Nelson 1 899: 202,•

Collection)

Ainu basketry and considered the relationship

Shapsnikoff and Hudson 1974). The Aleut

between them and the basketwork of the

examples are cylindrical, open-twined,

neighboring Japanese. Two types of Ainu

and share the same looped and braided rim

basketry—the twined-basketry bags (saranip)

finish with the Ainu. In construction tech¬

and the less-common coiled ware (tenki) —

niques, the Central Yup'ik twined basket (fig.

regions in the eighteenth and

do not have Japanese prototypes. This raises

43.8) is virtually indistinguishable from Aleut

a final question: what is the relationship

and Ainu examples.

between Ainu twined and coiled ware and
that of other nearby peoples?
43/AINU BASKETRY TRADITION

One compelling historical fact links
Aleut and Ainu twined weaving. According

307

to Valerii Shubin (1994), the Russian Ameri¬

Islands according to Stepan Krasheninnikov,

can Company sent Aleut and Koniag Eskimo

who explored the area between 1735 and

sea-otter hunters to Urup, Simushir, and

1741. He points out that Shumshu, the

Shumshu Islands, the northernmost Kurile

nearest of the Kuriles, was occupied jointly

Islands, between 1828 and 1870. Shubin does

by Kamchadal and Ainu, and that the extent

not list twined-basketry fragments among his

of intermarriage between them made it

findings of 10,000 archaeological objects,

difficult to distinguish one from the other

whether because of seeming insignificance,

(Krasheninnikov 1776: 3, 58, 70, 195, 295,

because none survived, or because none ap¬

311, see also Kreiner and Olschleger 1987:

peared in the excavations (Shubin 1994: 341—

13 and Montandon 1937: 1 10). Both the

44). He does note, however, that Aleut and

Kamchadal and the Maritime Koryak to

Koniag women were sent along with the

the north of them are known to have prac¬

hunters in the migrations of the 1820s and

ticed coiled basketry. In the Jesup Expedi¬

1830s (Shubin 1994: 338). Assuming that

tion collections deposited at the American

cross-fertilization could have occurred at this

Museum of Natural History, New York, are

time, it is unclear in which direction the

fifteen Koryak coiled grass or nettle baskets

twined-basketry bags traveled. On one hand,

and three from the Kamchadal (Lee 1995: 66

Murakami had collected one Ainu saranip

and Lee research notes),- they are virtually

earlier (Ezo-shima kikan, cited in Tanisawa and

indistinguishable from one another and

Sasaki 1982: 170),- on the other, William

closely resemble Ainu coiled grassware

Healy Dali excavated fragments of a twined

(Montandon 1937: 107-109,- Torii 1919:

basket in the Kagamil caves in the Aleutians

183, pi. 52). Krasheninnikov illustrates two

in the 1870s. Whether these fragments have

Maritime Koryak examples that are clearly

been radiocarbon-dated is unknown. Thus,

part of this same tradition (Krasheninnikov

Shubin's research raises as many questions as

1776: 218). Moreover, the Eskimos of west¬

it answers, though it does provide us with

ern Alaska began making baskets (fig. 43.9)

one definite point in time when a trans-

that closely resemble the Koryak coiled ware

Beringian cross-fertilization of culture could

(Nelson 1899) as early as the 1870s, a period

have taken place. In the broader context,

of lively trade between American whalers

then, the Ainu examples seem to be the

and traders and various native groups on

westernmost occurrence of a weaving tech¬

both sides of Bering Strait and as far south as

nique with a scattered distribution along the

the Sea of Okhotsk (Lee 1995: 64).

Pacific Rim from Ainu-occupied Hokkaido to

It seems likely that coiling spread to

northern California.

the Ainu from Kamchatka and that the tech¬

Coiled Basketry

recently than twining,- not only was its dis¬

Compared to twined basketry, the bundle-

tribution more limited, but there is no con¬

coiled grass basketry practiced by the Ainu

vincing evidence that coiling was known in

nique was established in this area far more

has had a more limited temporal and spatial

prehistoric times on either side of Bering

distribution across the North Pacific. Ainu

Strait (Lee 1995: 57). The existence of coil¬

coiled basketry seems to have occurred only

ing in the North Pacific, of which the Ainu

marginally—if at all—on Sakhalin and was

coiled baskets serve as the southwestern

limited mainly to the Kuriles,- some later

boundary, is evidence of intergroup trading

examples were collected in Hokkaido, where

connections facilitated by the broader Asian

they probably were made by basketmakers

or European-Asian "world systems" economy

from the northern islands or their descen¬

trade that took hold in Siberia during the

dants who resettled there.

late eighteenth and early nineteenth centu¬
ries (Lee and Graburn 1997). This system

Coiling was probably introduced to

308

the Kurile Ainu by way of the Kamchadal

created a web of interdependent relationships

(Itel'men) because the two groups jointly

between the peoples of Japan, the East Asian

occupied the southernmost tip of the

mainland, the Ainu homelands, the Kamchakta

Kamchatka Peninsula as well as the Kurile

Peninsula, and northeastern Siberia.

LIVING ARTS/ N. GRABURN

AND

M.

LEE

M

y grandparents are Matoku

44/A Personal

Rebirth
through Ainu
Traditional
Basketry
Nobliko Tsuda

have confirmed that story from my child¬

and Saki Miyamoto, who lived

hood. I thank both of my grandparents for

in Shiraoi. My father was

leaving me these memories.

Ainu, born as the second son,

My uncle's wife was very good at knit¬

and my mother is Japanese. When I was with

ting,- she knitted using thread connected to

grandmother Saki-fucbi 1 came in contact with

the edge of a braid hanging from the ceiling,

Ainu customs for the first time. My earliest

and as her fingers moved in what seemed like

memory of my grandfather Matoku-ehis/.k is of

complicated dances the braid developed little

sitting on his lap, running my fingers through

by little (fig. 44,1). When I was probably

his long beard while listening to him tell a

eight years old or so, I remember her knitting

story. He was making the image of a big wave

a braid from which to hang a sword (emushat).

as he told me a story about how difficult it

It was as if 1 were watching magic.

was to shoot a gun on the sea, because the

I became interested in Ainu knitting

waves rocked the boat. He told me that he

when I was about twenty-two years old. 1

had been to northwestern America to catch

visited the Ainu elder, Tare Urakawa-/«cLi, to

sea otter and he specifically mentioned the

learn how to make the pattern for the emushat

coffee he drank there—it must have been

and the backpack strap (tar). It was in

very fine coffee because he never forgot that

October 1968, and I stayed overnight at her

memory. He also talked about swordfish

place in Urakawa, learning knitting and

(sirikap; fig. 44.2). I can vividly remember him

chatting about this and that. When Tare

saying: "You see, a very large fish called sirikap

learned that I often did not feel well, she
opened the door of the wood heater, adjusted
the wood with an iron poker, and twisted a
thin line of white and black threads that she
held with her teeth. Then, in the Ainu
manner, she prayed, gesturing with the
twisted thread three times toward the burning
fire. After that she said, "1 wish you good
health," and she tied the twine around my
wrist. I later learned that the thread was an
amulet (ekaeka,- fig. 44.3).
For twenty years after that incident
1 was not involved with Ainu culture because
1 got married and was busy raising my chil¬
dren, but later I began to think of my heri¬
tage. I thought that objects that were stored
in museums might reveal aspects of my ances¬
tral culture, so I went to the Agriculture De¬
partment Museum of Hokkaido Llniversity to
study them. I completed a replica of one item
in two weeks, although it was hard work,when it was done, I was deeply moved by the
fact that I had just made a copy of one of the

44.1

Making a Basket

As part of their activities at the
Louisiana Purchase Centennial

swims in the ocean. The eyes of sirikap were so

tools the Ainu people had valued since the

big, and while the entire fish is fine-tasting,

old days. However, I was also overwhelmed

the eyes were the most delicious part."

by a sadness 1 could not control: I neither

Exposition held in St. Louis in

Last year 1 had occasion to talk about

speak nor understand the Ainu language,- 1 did

techniques for producing twined

my grandparents to Mr. Okino of the Agricul¬

not know how Ainu people think and behave,-

and coiled baskets for fair visitors.

ture Department Museum at Hokkaido

I did not understand various things I would

Shirake and Yazu demonstrate the

University. After listening to my stories, he

have known if I had been brought up in an

1904, Hokkaido Ainu demonstrated

use of a suspension yoke to make

said, "Let's go see the eyes of the sirikap," and

Ainu environment. That was the moment

he took me to his specimen room. Obviously

when 1 truly understood that I had to study

there were no "delicious eyes" on the skeleton

my culture. Gradually I realized that I could

a twined-grass basket in this
photograph by Jesse Tarbox Beals.
(NAA 98-10382)

hanging from the ceiling of the room, but

learn directly from elders in the community

there were two big holes wider than Mr.

who still knew the old ways, in addition to

Okino's outstretched fingers. I was excited to

getting knowledge from books and material

44/REBIRTH through

basketry

309

44.2 Ikupasuy with
Swordfish

Swordfish, along with whales, orcas,
and bears are among the large animals
that were most important for Ainu
subsistence and in their spiritual life.
This prayer stick (ikupasuy), which has
a lacquer finish, combines foreign
symbols—a yin-yang motif and
hearts—with a native motif, swordfish.
(BMA 12.317)

goods. In 1990 I was able to begin visiting

necessities. Through

many people.

efforts to preserve original

Through various encounters with
older women I learned a great deal about

techniques, Ainu culture can
be regained.

handcrafts. Nabe Shirosawa of Chitose in
Hokkaido gave me a particularly valuable

Handcrafts of Ainu Women

lesson in May 1992, the year before she

The Ainu people, who led a hunting and gather¬

died, when she was eighty-six years old she

ing existence, had to make their daily necessities

taught me how to weave a grass basket

by hand, including their clothes, mgs, bags, and

(saranip) from the recollections of her youth.

straps. Lacking measuring devices, they used body

Until then saranip weaving had died out in

parts, such as the width or length of fingers or a

the Chitose region, but through her instruc¬

hand, for measuring.

tions I was able to continue the tradition.

Woven baskets (saranip) were used for

The death of anyone who can orally

carrying food and as containers for food

relay traditions is a great loss for the Ainu

storage (figs. 44.4, 44.6). Made of such

culture. The government did not prohibit us

materials as linden or cattails, their size ranges

from making Ainu crafts,- the inadequate

from large bags for food preservation to small

preservation of Ainu traditional knowledge

ones for holding items like cigarettes or

was due to the prohibition of the Ainu

lighters,- they do not have lids and their rims

language and the ban on traditional meth¬

are sometimes braided. There are two ways to

ods of hunting and salmon fishing. It is also

make them, one using tools and the other not.

true that the need for making daily necessi¬

The method Nabe Shirosawa employed

ties by hand decreased because of the avail¬

was the latter (figs. 44.5). She had never made

ability of cheap, machine-made Japanese

a saranip herself, but as a child she had

products. While the technique for weaving

watched others making them. Her power of

a sword strap was not inherited because

recollection was amazing, and she taught me,

swords are no longer used, the technique

as follows: prepare the warp and weft,- make

has survived, and the number of people who

the bottom part first,- attach the ring-formed

The power of this amulet is greatly

can weave the strap is increasing. Some

part, which was made according to the length

enhanced by its sacred lanyard made of

technologies that once were thought to be

of the bottom- tie the ring with a hanging

lost are now being revived by the repro¬

thread and suspend it,- weave the body part as

44.3

Female Spirit Guardian

twisted strands of black-and-white cord.
Such cords (eka eka) were made and used

duction of museum items and artifacts, but

it hangs. The trick to this process is hooking

especially those dangerous to health and

these skills must be integrated into our daily

the ring and hanging string. A simple ring is

fertility. (AMS 61022)

lives even though they may not be everyday

made using a twig attached to the bottom of

3 40

LIVING ARTS/N TSUDA

by women to help ward off evil spirits,

44.4

Woven Basket

This twined elm-bast basket (saranip),
collected in Piratori, Hokkaido, by

the saranip, to which the hanging string is

upright loom (iteseni), which is also used for

hooked, then dangled. The hanging string is

mat weaving (fig. 44.7). In order to use this

measured according to the length of both

loom, two stones (pit) are needed for each

Bashford Dean for the American

arms extended, and the ring at the bottom is

warp. If you weave using ten warps, twenty

shows a complicated decorative

tied at the end of the string. The strings for

stones will be necessary. The structure is

weaving pattern. (AMNH 70/4094)

the second and the third locations are passed

made of two three-legged tree limbs with a

through from the other side, and the end

detachable straight limb as a cross member so

of the string is tied and fastened at the fourth

it can come apart for easy transport.

Museum of Natural History in 1900,

place. The first and fourth locations are fixed,

Ainu women handcrafted various other

but the second and third are adjustable so that

items, including: skin clothes and footwear,-

the strings can be set at the same length.

bags for the transport, gathering, and storing

Toyo Sasamura showed me another

of food and for storing rugs and bedding,- and

method that suspended the starting ring with

mats, which were used not only as floor cov¬

four strings rather than one. She told me a

erings but also to help insulate the walls of

story: "Once, when I went out with my elder

the house. The materials for these products

sisters for mountain work, it started raining

were secured by both men and women.

suddenly, so we waited for the rain to stop in

People gathered tree bark in the spring, and

a hut. Someone said, 'Let's have fun,' and we

after it fermented and was rinsed with water it

began making saranip, really fast!" They used

was dried and stripped into threads for mak¬

bark from a nearby tree, which they peeled

ing fabric. Grasses and cattails, the materials

with a hatchet.

used for mats, were also gathered in summer

Saranip can also be woven with an
44/REBIRTH THROUGH

BASKETRY

and dried in a shady and breezy place. Men

31l

44.5

Basketry Technique

These diagrams by the author illustrate
stages in the production of saranip
using a suspension system, (courtesy
of Nobuko Tsuda)

44.6

Plaited Basket

Baskets using the same twining and
rim-braiding techniques found in elmbast baskets could also be made with
strips of reed, bulrush, or thin wood
splints. Although more fragile than elmbast baskets, plaited baskets could be
produced quickly and were handy for
storing clothing and household effects.

44.6

and women also caught salmon and dried
their skins for making boots and rainproof
garments. Throughout the rest of the year
these materials, which were indispensible to
Ainu life, were processed and produced, espe¬
cially during the winter when it was difficult to
work outside. It was during this period that Ainu
women took up their looms and needles and
began the laborious, artful task of producing the
garments whose design and decoration signified,
more than any other product, the identity of the
Ainu people.
44.7

44.7 Weaving with a Loom
Saranip may also be produced with a
standing loom frame, which was more
frequently employed for making large floor
and wall mats as illustrated in the
photograph of the artist’s grandmother,
(courtesy of Nobuko Tsuda)

312

LIVING ARTS / N. TSUDA

I

NDIGENOUS PEOPLE FROM EVERY CORNER

45 Clothing and
Ornamentation
Mari Kodama

clothes from cotton obtained from neighbor¬

of the world are known for their artistic

ing regions, while silk was introduced only in

ingenuity in the areas of clothing and

such finished products as textiles from

fashion. It boggles the modern mind to

Honshu and cloth imported by Santan traders

see the creativity of our ancestors' dress,

from the continent via Sakhalin (Ezonisbiki,

whoever they might have been. From the

calico, muslin, velvet, and other Chinese

earliest times clothes were always more than a

cloth) (see S. Sasaki, this volume).

way to keep warm and dry,- fashion was a by¬

Animal-hide materials were derived

product of invention, personal expression, and

from land and sea animals. Land animals

the influence of other cultures. Ainu fashion

whose hides were used for clothing included

(fig. 45.1) certainly fits this description.

bear, deer, raccoon dog, fox, dog, and rabbit.

Gender roles determined the form of

Besides providing material for clothing, these

artistic expression practiced by members of

hides were used as outerwear in cold weather,

Ainu society, as it did in many ancient cultures.

sometimes with fur intact and sometimes with

Women, by virtue of the fact that they made all

the fur removed. Among the sea mammals,

garments and other fabric items, were totally

seal, sea otter, fur seal, and sea lion were often

responsible for clothing design, which is one of

used in the clothing of the Sakhalin Ainu ,

the most distinctive and public forms of Ainu art.

whose women also used animal fur for their

Designs, decorative features, and the names of

hairbands. Ainu-e, the prints and drawings that

these varied depending on region, intermarriage,

provide some of the earliest visual evidence

individual creativity, and materials available.

about this culture, include images of Hok¬
kaido Ainu wearing animal-hide clothing as
late as 1800.
Like other North Pacific native peoples,
the Ainu made durable and stylish clothes
from a variety of fish (see Dubreuel this
volume), including salmon, Sakhalin trout, ito
(Japanese buchen), and others,- several dozen
fishskins were required to make one garment.
For birdskin clothes (fig. 45.6), skins (with
their feathers attached) of seabirds such as
tufted puffin, goose, seagull, and albatross
were used to produce light, warm, and
waterproof garments. Birdskin clothing, worn
primarily in the Kuriles, where land mammals
were mostly absent, is extremely rare even in
museum collections.

The Ainu people utilized the wild game
they hunted for more than just hides to make
clothing and ornaments. Of course, the meat
and internal organs of the animals were food
sources, and bone, ivoiy, and horn were made
into utensils, hunting tools, and sewing
needles. Sewing thread made from both
45.1

A Variety of Fashions

Clothing materials can be divided into

Ainu seamstresses produced a wide

two general categories: those of animal origin

variety of clothing types with designs

and those of plant origin. A third category

that varied from region to region. This

animal sinew and plant fibers was an indis¬
pensable commodity.
Two types of cloth were made from

involves materials that the Ainu did not

plants: bark and grass. Bark cloth (attush) was

Curious Sights of Ezo Island (1799)

procure locally from natural sources but

made by weaving fiber obtained from the
endodermis of the elm tree,- the Japanese

illustration from Shimanojo Murakami's

shows Hokkaido Ainu wearing many

obtained from Honshu or the Asian conti¬

different types of clothing, from fur and

nent, either as intermediate fabrics or as

linden and the harunire (litmus davidiana planch

feather to fabrics, while performing a

finished products. Clothes made of animal

var. japonica Nakai,- chikisani [Ainu]), were also

materials include hide—from both land and

sometimes used, but the quality was inferior

marine mammals—birdskin, and fishskin

to that of the elm. Garments made from bark

garments,- plant products were derived from

cloth (fig. 45.7) were worn as formal clothes

bark and grass fibers. The Ainu also made

if they were appliqued or embroidered,

circle dance. (HML)

45/CLOTHING AND ORNAMENTATION

313

45.2, 45.3, 45.4

Preparing Ohyo

In addition to its use for making cord,
rope, and basketry, the inner bark (bast
fiber) of the Japanese elm (fig. 45.2)
provided fiber for weaving attush. the
staple material used to make Ainu
clothing before cotton and silk fabrics
were imported. Preparing ohyo involved
stripping bark from the elm (fig. 45.3)
while leaving enough so that the tree
would survive. The soft inner bark was
then separated from the outer bark and
submerged in water for several days,
as shown in this illustration (fig. 45.4)
from a nineteenth-century copy of
Shimanojo Murakami's Curious Sights

of Ezo Island. Within a few days the
fibers loosened and could be peeled
45.4

into strands that could be used to
make thread and cord, (courtesy of M.
Kodama; HML; NMNH 150677)

nonpatterned ones were used as casual wear.

matured and become rough. Once the quality

The fiber for grass cloth came from the

of the hark has been determined, a cut of

endodermis of the nettle plant found growing

about five to six inches (twelve to fifteen

wild in the fields (fig. 45.5a); like elm bark,

centimeters) is made and the strip of bark is

these fibers were twisted into thread, which

peeled off (fig. 45.3).

was then woven on a loom. Such fabrics were

After the bark is peeled, its outer surface

once woven in Sakhalin, but because this

is immediately removed, for once it dries it

technique has been lost, nettle weaving is

will not come off. The inner bark is then

known only from old documents and

soaked in a hot spring—or for about a week

existing garments.

or longer in a slow-moving stream or swamp
water—to soften it (fig. 45.4) so that it will

Gathering and Treating

be easy to split. Once the bark is divided into

Bark-Fiber Materials

several pieces it is taken out of the water and

The lengthy process of making attush begins

its sliminess is removed by running water,- if

with gathering plant materials and process¬

this slimy layer is not removed thoroughly,

ing them as thread. To test the quality of the

the bark cannot be peeled thin because the

fiber a small cut is made into the bark of a

layers will stick to each other when dried.

young elm tree whose surface has not

The washed inner bark, which may have as

LIVING ARTS/M

KODAMA

45.5 a-e From Fiber to Fabric

Once elm bast was separated into
strands, it was twisted into twostrand thread and rolled into balls
or skeins. Women performed the
laborious task of twisting thread,
documented in this Ainu-e from a
nineteenth-century copy of
Shimanojo Murakami's Illustra¬

tions of Ezo Livelihood.
In Hokkaido and Sakhalin fiber
was also extracted from the nettle
plant; it was obtained by a slightly
different process than that used
for elm bast. Bronislaw Pilsudski's
1903-05 photograph (a) illus¬
trates nettle-fiber preparation.
Garments made with nettle fiber
were finer and lighter in color than
rough, golden-colored attush and
created a striking contrastive
ground for embroidery.

Cloth was woven on a backstrap
loom so simple and efficient that
it could be packed into a small
bag. This loom could produce
narrow straps and belts, or bolts
of cloth up to 15 to 20 centimeter
wide. A backstrap loom is
tensioned by a strap or, in the
Ainu version, by a wood brace that
fits around the back of the
operator's waist. By leaning back
the operator causes the warp to
tighten and the various parts of
the loom can function. The loom
parts illustrated here (d) from left
to right include a warp guide

(wosa), separator (kamakap), warp
rolling post (ahunkani), weft spool
and heddle (sokobo; pekauuni),
weft beater (attush-pera), cloth roll
stick (itumamuni), and backstrap
brace (ishitomushni). The spatula¬
shaped weft beater (e), used to
spread the warps and tamp in the
wefts, was often carved with
beautiful Ainu designs.

(a = NA A47380; b = NAA 47545;
c = HML; d = courtesy of M.
Kodama; e = PEM E3105)

45/ CLOTH I NG AND

ORNAMENTATION

3 15

Ob

PI' iiwfflS

45.6

Duckskin Robe

Ainu living in the northern Kuriles did
not have access to the hides of such
fur-bearing animals as bears and deer
to produce warm winter clothing, so

"
tsT

'%
*

RL 1

jjgp*

nl
' 'KSm

i
*

Bjp4i£ •,

V

m Wy " i

n

.tvJB
T|ll.

pjT

;
(

-wSfc'

Wkts HL&

many as nine layers, is dried for four to five days

it eventually settled at the level of the ankle.

in the sun. Fibers from the inner bark are long

Such cotton garments open in the front, have

and must be split carefully by hand,- they are

sleeves, and look identical to a Japanese

then twisted and tied into a skein (fig. 45.5c).

kimono at a glance, but they have neither the
vertical collar nor the uniformly wide sleeves

they made use of a readily available
resource: ducks. Skins of ducks, cor¬

Clothing Made from

specific to a kimono,- instead, the sleeves taper

morants, gulls, puffins, albatrosses,

Imported Cotton

from the armpit to the wrist.

ravens, and other marine birds were
often used for clothing by island-dwell¬

Other textiles were introduced to the Ainu

Tapered sleeves (mojiri) are the most

from nearby areas, typically in the form of old

common type of sleeve seen on Ainu robes.

cotton remnants and used garments. The

This form was utilized primarily for working

absent or rare. In addition to being

legend of the Honshu fisherman whose cotton

clothes in Honshu because the angled cut at

plentiful, duckskins could be pieced

clothing was replaced with a hide outfit when

the bottom made it easier to move the arm,

together to produce beautiful patterns.

he was blown ashore in Ainu territory

whereas the square-cut dangling sleeve of the

illustrates the importance the Ainu placed on

Japanese formal kimono interfered with the

cotton garments.

wearer's ability to perform many tasks and so

ing peoples throughout the North in
places where land mammals were

This robe, collected from the Kuriles by
Alexander Agassiz before 1893, is one
of the few Ainu feather robes extant.
(PMC 51603)

316

Cotton clothing was made from old

signified that the person was at leisure. Ainu

cotton remnants that were patched together

garments were more practical. Although the

into a full robe. The robe would then be

wide Wajin (Japanese) sleeve is often seen in

appliqued with cutouts of silk and other

clothing made of attush, only a few cotton

materials and embroidered. The length of this

garments use this sleeve type. Other sleeve

garment originally was about four inches (ten

types that utilize minimal fabric (like the mojiri)

centimeters) below the knee, but as time passed

are tube and boat-bottom.

LIVING ARTS/M.

KODAMA

are then surrounded on both
sides with white chain-stitching.
Many cbikarkarpe are still
worn today in former ports and
fishing sites on the west coast
of Hokkaido (fig. 45.9). The
garments in this region are longer
and come in two forms: one type
utilizes men's Japanese kimonos from
Honshu which are then appliqued and
embroidered; the other removes the vertical
collar from the kimonos and adds embroi¬
dered applique. The width of the applique of
this garment is a bit narrow, and the space
between the appliques is wide. Much of the
embroidery is done with single chain-stitch.

Chijiri
These clothes have embroidered patterns only,

with no applique (fig. 45.10). In addition to
cotton, velvet and serge are sometimes used.
Some chijiri are embroidered over the entire
surface area,- others have patterns on the upper
and lower parts of the back or collar and the
bottom edge of the garment, or on the end of
the sleeve. In the Asahikawa region, colored
thread is used for this embroidery, while
elsewhere monochromatic thread is used

Ruunpe
Among Ainu clothing, ruunpe (figs. 45.11,
45.12) is the most colorful and intricate and
boasts a large amount of applique and em¬
broidery. The applique cloth consists of a
45.7

Attush Robe

This bark-cloth (attush) robe was
donated to the Peabody Essex
Museum in 1916 by six friends:
Edward S. Morse, W. S. Bigelow,

Cotton clothes are categorized into four

narrow band that is sewn straight or turned

groups, described below: cbikarkarpe, chijiri,

in right angles to make patterns. In addition

ruunpe, and kaparamip. Differences in these four

to red silk bands, which were most com¬

are mainly in the type of cotton used,

monly used, applique was applied to rem¬

C. S. Rea, W. C. Endicott, P. Lowell,

appliques, and cutout patterns, but there are

nants of kosote (a type of muslin), calico, and

and R. Osgood. Although the place

many regional differences as well.

white cotton hand towels with narrow

and date of its origins were not
recorded, it was probably collected

stripes. These garments are made of old
Chikarkarpe

cotton remnants with a narrow extension

Cbikarkarpe fall into three different categories.

under both arms to extend the width of the

One type still in use in the Shizunai region is

design, and sometimes extra cloth is added at

made of thick striped cotton (shima) and is

the hip. The ruunpe collar takes two forms: in

in Hokkaido in the late nineteenth
century. (PEM E16503)

appliqued all over with black or dark-blue

one version a cloth is attached to the back

cotton. Another type is made of a soft cotton

collar area and is then embroidered,- in the

with dyed designs. It is appliqued with black or

other, more applique is sewn to the collar

dark-blue cotton at the hip area and in the

and then embroidered. The front area has a

upper and lower back,- the back midsection

simple collar-type applique. The edge of the

does not have a design In the Saru River area,

applique is sewn to the garment in a manner

the chest of the garment also remains without

similar to the method used in making

ornamentation. Many garments from this

fishskin clothes among the Sakhalin Ainu,

region have a distinctive style of patterning at

the Nivkhi, and the Nanai, who live in

the bottom edge: red thread is used to make

northern Sakhalin and near the mouth of the

embroidered patterns in the central area which

Amur River. The applique pattern seen at the

45 / CLOTHING AND ORNAMENTATION

31 7

45.9

45.10

Chikarkarpe Robe

45.9-45.14

45.11

Chijiri Robe

(AMS)

(AMS)

Ruunpe Robe

(AMS)

Ainu Robe Series

Most of the robes in this series illustrate
prominent styles used by the Hokkaido
Ainu; the nettle-fiber cloth in fig. 45.14
is characteristic of Sakhalin.

45.8

Ainu Robe and Japanese Kimono

Ainu robe (a) and Japanese kimono (b)
shapes are illustrated in these two
drawings by M. Kodama. The major
difference between them is that Ainu
garments have tapered rather than
square-cut sleeves; there are other
differences as well, especially in their
decorative treatment.

bottom edge of the garment and the tip of the

centimeters) pieces of muslin, silk, or calico,

sleeve also resembles designs used by the

with remnants applied to the upper back part

Sakhalin Ainu, suggesting some kind of con¬

of the garment. Many of these remnants are

nection between them.
Ruunpe are seen on the Pacific coast

red, but other colors are also used. One of the
characteristics of some ruunpe is a contrasting

(Uchiura [Volcano] Bay) of Hokkaido from

color thread that is placed alongside the

Yakumo to Abuta, Usu, and Shiraoi, while

applique, and this thread and the applique are

people in the Hidaka region do not even

cord-stitched together. This method is often

know the word. Ruunpe are of several types:

employed on ruunpe using silk, muslin, and

the applique may be made only from narrow

calico applique.

pieces of cloth, or, as in Shiraoi, made with

Sewing thread is made from such plants

patterns cut out of twelve-inch-wide (thirty

as nettle and staff trees (tsuruume modoki; Celastrus
obiculatus tbuub). The nettle plant is made into

45.15

Spearing Octopus

embroidery thread,- black, white, and red

This Ainu-e from Teiryo Kodama’s

cotton thread and colored silk (komacbi)

eighteenth-century Scenes from Ezo

thread are also used for ruunpe embroidery.

Island shows Ainu gathering food at the
seashore. The figure spearing an octo¬

Kaparamip

pus is wearing a gold-colored bark-cloth

(attush) garment while the middle

Kaparamip are cotton clothes with a large

figure holding the basket is wearing

amount of white cloth appliqued in cutout

clothing made from bleached nettle

patterns. The layout of the white cloth varies

fiber, (courtesy of M. Kodama)

depending on the desired pattern. In one type
the white cloth is used vertically, covering
from the bottom of the back body to the chest

318

LIVING ARTS/M.

KODAMA

45.12

Ruunpe Robe

(AMS)

45.13

area of the garment,- in

Clothes of the Sakhalin Ainu

another, white cloth is

Some Sakhalin Ainu clothes are similar to

used horizontally from

those worn in Hokkaido, while others are

the back to the front

completely different. Of the clothes made

of the body.

of animal material, most of those made of the

and sea lion) and from fish materials (such as

methods. Some of the

Sakhalin trout, salmon, and ito) are unique

earlier styles of

to the Sakhalin Ainu.

In 1909 a collector of Ainu materials

These animal-skin garments are made

made up of individual

in a "western" style, that is, with a stand-up

small pieces of white

collar, open front, buttons, narrow sleeves,

cloth, while others

and flaring skirt: they are completely

were made by

asked a group of Ainu women from

hides of sea mammals (such as seal, fur seal,

are made with these

kaparamip had patterns

Women of Piratori

Retarpe Robe

(AMS)

Many kaparamip

45.16

45.14

Kaparamip Robe

(AMS)

European in style. On the other hand,

stitching together small pieces of white

Sakhalin Ainu fishskin clothes are quite

cotton cloth to make one large applique that

similar to those of the Nanai people, who

was then covered with detail stitching. This

live near the estuary of the Amur River,

seemed to reflect a time when obtaining large

which suggests that the Asian continent also

the left is wearing a robe that Mary

quantities of cloth was difficult. 1 used to

influenced these clothing forms. One line of

Sharpies Schaffer purchased for the

believe that kaparamip had first been made in

thread is sewn alongside the applique on

University of Pennsylvania Museum

the Shizunai region in the Taisho era (1912—

fishskin garments, a technique also seen on

(seen in fig. 42.4). It was rare for

1926), but in 1995 Japanese scholars who had

the ruunpe of the Hokkaido Ainu.

Piratori to pose for a picture in their
ceremonial garments. The woman on

photographs to be taken of Ainu
using or wearing objects that were

studied Ainu materials in Russian museums

Retarpe, the nettle-fiber cloth of Sakhalin,

then acquired by museum collectors,

convinced me that examples of this style date

is a white or gray textile against which

(photo by Mary Schaffer, WMCR)

to the nineteenth century.

embroidery done with colored thread is quite

Patterns of kaparamip can be divided into

striking (fig. 45.14).These grass-fiber clothes

two principal types: one uses morew, a whorl

use patterns and colors characteristic of conti¬

pattern (fig. 45.13),- in the other, the area of

nental areas. For example, the fade-resistant

white cloth is large and the cutout areas are

dyed red cloth used for the applique work was

small, creating a reverse or negative pattern.

made in China.

Another variation has cloth inserts between

Generally, the clothing of Sakhalin Ainu

the lining of the garment to give the cutouts

utilizes many different types of collars and

the illusion of depth. All these types originate

sleeves. Compared to the clothes and

in the Shizunai region but now have spread to

ornaments of the Hokkaido Ainu, which

all areas of Hokkaido. According to elderly

have been greatly influenced by Honshu,

people in the Asahikawa area, kaparamip were

those of the Sakhalin Ainu seem to be

worn during mourning.

strongly influenced by the Ul'chi and Nivkhi

45 / CLOTHING AND ORNAMENTATION

319

informed of their children's whereabouts, and
in most Amur Region cultures, bells and metal
objects have since ancient times had spiritual
connections—they either warded off evil
spirits or attracted friendly ones.

Designs on Clothes
For the Ainu the design and ornamentation of
clothing are not simply for beauty and
enjoyment. The importance of traditional
patterns can be seen in the fact that young
Ainu girls played by drawing patterns in the
sand and in the ashes of the hearth,- this gave
them training for making clothes and patterns
when they grew older. The patterns and
designs have been passed down along
maternal lines for generations, from grand¬
mothers to mothers, from mothers to daugh¬
ters (fig. 45.18).
45.17 Sealskin Robe

The patterns can be categorized by

Sealskin garments

method and design. The methods have gener¬

were worn by many

ally two types: embroidery and applique. Em¬

North Pacific
coastal peoples, includ¬

broidered patterns are applied on most fabric

ing the Ainu. Although this material has

who shared the narrow island, as well as the

little insulating property, it was durable

clothing of other continental ethnic groups.

items, including garments, headbands, and
sword straps. Garments, in particular, have

and attractive. The natural beauty of

exquisite applique and cutout patterns that

this well-tailored sealskin coat is en¬
hanced by colorful trim and embroidery
done in a Sakhalin style. (PMC 7044)

45.18

Design School

Women's Underclothes and

use several stitching techniques. According to

Children's Garments

Dr. Sakuzaemon Kodarna, a specialist in em¬

Ainu women's underclothes were called mour,

broidery, there are eleven basic techniques. By

literally "deer," a sort of one-piece dress with

combining some of these fundamental meth¬

an open front,- it is said that in the old days

ods, many dozens of stitching combinations

Every mother taught her daughter tradi¬

they were made of hides. In Kushiro, deerskin

can be created The eleven basic techniques

make clothing, and by the age of twelve

mour were said to have been worn, which may

are illustrated in fig. 45.20.

most girls were already helping with

be where the name derived from. Ainu

clothing production. Gender-based work

women began wearing mour at the age of

made by stitching pieces of cotton or silk

was practiced by most native peoples,

fourteen or fifteen. In some regions, the mour

cloth to the basic garment fabric. The

worn by an old woman who had enjoyed a

applique patterns are categorized as remnant

long life was reused to make clothes for a

applique and cloth-cutout applique Remnant

newborn baby, in hopes of giving the child

applique is applied on clothing such as attusb,

a long life.

ruunpe, chikarkarpe, and retarpe,- many of the

tional Ainu design motifs and how to

and garment-making was definitely an
Ainu woman’s task. (NAA 98-10385)

Soft materials were used for children's
clothing, and as noted, clothing for a

patterns use straight lines, while curved lines
are few. Cloth-cutout applique patterns are

newborn baby was often made from older

made by placing relatively large pieces of

women's underwear. Some historical docu¬

white cloth over a garment's base fabric and

ments note that Ainu children were almost

then cutting away unwanted pieces to leave a

always kept naked until the age of three or

positive or negative picturelike pattern that

four. Older children's clothing was made from

was then stitched to the textile. These

adults' used attush, which was softer than new

patterns are often seen on kaparamip of the

material. Traditionally the Hokkaido Ainu

Hidaka region and are characterized by many

people preferred not to dress their children

curves.

up, but that custom has changed. Sakhalin

320

Applique patterns, called iechunu, are

There are nineteen traditional patterns,

Ainu, on the other hand, traditionally embroi¬

of which ay us and morew patterns are most

dered children's clothes or attached small

common. The ayus ("having a thorn") pattern

pieces of metal at their bottom of their gar¬

is similar in shape to mathematical parenthe¬

ments,- according to older Sakhalin women,

ses ({ j). A single ayus pattern is never used,

the sound of these metal chimes kept them

they are always arrayed in multiples, forming

LIVING ARTS/M

KODAMA

45.19

Ainu Design Motifs

These nineteen design elements are
the basic decorative motifs seen on
Ainu clothing, (courtesy of M. Kodama)
1.

Design pattern with thorns

2.

Whorl design

3.

Whorl design with thorns

4.

Whorl design with many corners

5-7. Cruciform designs
8, 9. “Eye" design
10.

Double whorl design

11.

Whorl design with “eyes"

12.

Whorl design with thorns

13.

Whorl design with

14.

Bud-shaped design

on both sides

squared-off corners
15. 16. Blooming flower design
17.

Design of the tip of a whorl

18.

Vinelike design

19.

Bell-shaped design

45.20

Embroidery Stitches

Embroidery was usually applied to
appliqued fabric or occasionally di¬
rectly on to the garment itself. The
eleven most common stitches are
illustrated here.

Ainu women state emphatically that there is no

1. Karami (intertwined) stitch or koma

hidden meaning and that the abstract patterns

stitch (Ainu ikarari): couching stitch and

as a whole are made simply to please the kamuy,

cord stitch
2. Kusari (chain) stitch (Ainu oho):

or gods. Berthold Laufer, the pioneering

chain stitch and open chain stitch

ethnologist of the lower Amur, received a

3. Hashiri (running) stitch (Ainu ohoturi):

virtually identical answer when he asked this

running stitch; also occurring as a

question of the Sakhalin Nivkhi in 1900.

twisted running stitch, used for tacking
4. Sen stitch (Ainu horkakemash):
outline stitch

Women's and Men's Accoutrements

5. Hajo stitch (no term in Ainu):
feather stitch

As in all other cultures, Ainu use accessories to

6. Kata hajo stitch (Ainu earoho):

complete their basic complex of dress and

single feather stitch

personal ornamentation, including various

7. Henkei chidorigake: a variation of
the couching stitch

types of headgear and jewelry that are still

8. Sashi stitch: darning stitch

worn today by Ainu people both in everyday

9. Kaeshi stitch: back stitch

and ceremonial life. Womens accoutrements

10. Henkei hajo stitch:
closed feather stitch

included several types of headgear, leggings,

11. Juji stitch: cross stitch

and jewelry,- attush aprons (fig. 45.24) are also

Among these eleven stitches,

a common part of a woman's costume.

numbers one through six, and
45.21

especially one and two, are most
commonly employed.

45.20

continuous lines. This pattern is used in a
number of ornamentation styles and is an
important element of Ainu designs.
The morew pattern is a simple spiral,
v/hich makes one-and-a-ha!f or fewer circles.
45.21

Needlecase

When one pattern is used independently,

Needles were very important items

which is rare, it is placed at the center-line of

for Ainu women, and they were kept

the back; this use of an independent pattern is

safe in specially carved neediecases.

often seen on the hanging part of a woven

This small example holds needles in

sword strap. Scholars have advanced various

a chamber at the base, which slides
open. The concave sides of the elabo¬

theories to explain the meaning of the

rately decorated panel served as a

patterns, ranging from personal artistic

thread spool. (BMA 12.789)

expression to animal-form designs, but older

45/CLOTHING and ornamentation

321

45.23

45.22

Embroidered Headband

Cotton headbands (matanpush) were
originally worn by Ainu men to keep
their hair in place as they worked, but
Ainu women have worn them during
ceremonies for at least two centuries.
Red cloth, one of the earliest textiles to
be imported, has had special signifi¬
cance for Ainu people for centuries; this
red cloth appears to be old and was
probably recycled from family heir¬
looms. (FMC 234945)

45.23

Choker

Chokers (rekutunpe) of this type were
worn by Sakhalin Ainu women, who had
access to a wide variety of continental
trade goods. This piece, collected by
Arthur James in Hokkaido in 1898, is a
veritable treasure chest of exotic
items, including glass and pewter
beads, a sword hilt, and Chinese bells.
(AMNH 70/11)

322

LIVING ARTS/M.

KODAMA

Headbands (fig. 45.22) are worn with
formal dress on such occasions as ceremonies
and dancing. There are two kinds of
headbands: matanpush are made of black
cotton embroidered in the center area and
are about forty inches (one meter) long and
two to three inches (five to eight centime¬
ters) wide. In recent times matanpush embroi¬
dery has become increasingly brighter,
whereas in the past, when the band was worn
by both men and women, it used to be done
only in black. Matanpush are seen primarily in
Shiraoi and the Saru River area.
Chepanup, an eighty-inch-long (two
meter) headcover of black cloth, is folded
three or four times and stitched. The way in
which it is tied varies depending on the
occasion, that is, whether it is worn for
mourning or for celebration. The chepanup is
seen on the coastal areas from Niikkappu to
Samani in southern Hidaka.
Ainu women wear chokers, called
rekutunpe, made from a strip of cloth
about one inch (three
centimeters) wide of black
and dark-blue cotton or
45.24

velvet (figs. 45.23, 45.26).

Attush Apron

Men and women generally wore

Designed to be tied in the

aprons as part of their regular cos¬

back with separate straps of

tume. Many of these were given the

cloth or buttoned, they fit the

same decorative treatment as cer¬

throat tightly. Sometimes one or

emonial robes, probably for the

several metal ornaments are

same reasons: to protect vulnerable
spots from evil gods. The commonly

attached to the front of the strap or to

used ayus pattern can be seen here,

a small flap that hangs down from the

(AMNH 703/4895)

choker strap.
Necklaces (tamasay) composed of large
45.25

glass beads were treasures for Ainu women,
who wore them at formal occasions and
ceremonies (figs. 45.27). Old necklaces were
imported from China, but those from the
end of the Edo period (1615-1868) to early
Meiji period (late 1800s) were usually made
in Sakai (Osaka) and Edo (Tokyo) in Honshu.
Tamasay come in two forms: one has an

45.25, 45.26

ornamental plaque called a sbitoki (figs. 45.28,

Rosette IVIolo

45.29), and the other has a very large

and Choker

central glass bead (fig. 45.27).

A choker (rekutunpe) often made of
black or dark blue velvet, was a
standard accessory for Ainu
women. Rekutunpe often had
small metal rosette decorations
attached to them, which may
have originated as Japanese family
crest designs. The Japanese originally
made pewter rosettes for trade to the Ainu
until Ainu began to mold them. This mold
(fig. 45.25) was collected by Stewart Culin
in 1912. (BMA 12.175; FMC 88019)

45/CLOTHING and ornamentation

323

45.27

45.29

324

LIVING ARTS/M

KODAMA

initial pattern was applied, tattooing was
repeated several times over the course of
several years, and it was usually completed
before marriage. Girls were considered to be
adults by the time their tattooing was com¬
plete. Tattoos were an important component of
an Ainu woman's beauty.
Tattoos were produced by first making
many tiny cuts with an obsidian-blade knife
(fig. 45.32) in the area to be tattooed. Soot
taken from the bottom of a pot suspended
over a birch fire was rubbed into the wound,
followed by the application of antiseptic juice
from plants like mugwort. Tattoo patterns
differ from region to region,
45.27

Beaded Necklace

and their meaning, if any, is

Beaded necklaces (tamasay) were

unknown, but they are

worn by Ainu women on ceremonial

thought to protect the wearer.

occasions. In addition to their impor¬
tance as fashion, necklaces also

At various times

provided the wearer with spiritual

Japanese authorities prohib¬

protection; similar beliefs were held by

ited the use of tattoos by the

Siberian mainland peoples. Black-and-

Ainu. In 1799, during the Edo

white glass beads, as seen in this
necklace collected by Stewart Culin in

period when Ezo was con¬

1912, were very popular, but blue and

trolled by the shogunate, a

multicolored beads were also common.

ban on tattoos was issued:

Some Ainu beads have been traced to

"Regarding the rumored

Central Asia, but China and Russia

tattoos, those already done

were the usual sources (especially for
large turquoise-colored ones) until the

cannot be helped, but those

45.31

still unborn are prohibited from being

Dutch began supplying beads in the
seventeenth century. (BMA X2001.26)

45.28, 45.29

Necklaces with

In addition to necklaces made only of beads,

tattooed." In 1871, after the Meiji Restora¬

some had old coins placed between the beads

tion, the Hokkaido Development Mission

or had ninkari (hoop-shaped earrings) sus¬

proclaimed that "those born after this day are

pended on the right and left sides of the

strictly prohibited from being tattooed."

be especially effective amulets, and

necklace string. In Sakhalin, necklaces are

Today the custom of tattooing has completely

some were made for this purpose in

called imuhsay, and the Ainu there preferred to

disappeared.

China and Japan. The expense of

make them with small blue beads,- Hokkaido

Medallions

Imported medallions were thought to

obtaining such valuable trade items

Ainu also wore this type of necklace.

Men's special accoutrements included
ceremonial headgear and swords. Adult Ainu

reinforced the Ainu belief in their
protective power. Ainu-e illustrations

Earrings (figs. 45.30, 45.3 1) are called

men today still wear a crownlike headdress

(fig. 45.29) and most early photo¬

ninkari in the Ainu language. The lobes of Ainu

(called sapanpe or sapaunpe) as part of their

graphs of Ainu women show them

women's ears were pierced when they were

ceremonial attire. Most are woven from small

posed with their prized necklaces,

young, and a red silk or cotton cloth was

tree limbs and grapevine stems whose surfaces

placed through the holes to keep them open.

have been shaved up from the stems into tufts

(courtesy of M. Kodama)

On certain special occasions, such as at

(inaw-kike) that are twisted together,- for

The earliest mention of earrings

celebrations, people wore ninkari made in the

religious ceremonies the wood of the dog¬

(ninkari) being worn by the Ainu was

form of hoops of brass, trade silver, and lead

wood tree is usually used. Some sapanpe are

by Jesuit Father Girolamo de Angeiis

wire ranging from one to six inches (three to

made only of woven shavings. The headdress

in 1621; he noted that both men and

fifteen centimeters) in diameter. In recent

is tied in back and front so that it grips the

years ninkari are worn only by women, but in

head, and wood shavings (kike) are attached to

45.30, 45.31 Beaded Earrings

women wore silver hoops in their
ears. The ninkari in fig. 45.30 are
decorated with glass beads; those in

the Edo period men also wore them.

it. Some sapanpe have carved wooden bear or

Traditionally it was customary for women

wolf heads or shaved "wooden flowers," while

beads. In 1876 the Japanese prohib¬

to wear tattoos on the lips, forearms, and hands,-

some have shark teeth or bear claws attached

ited the Ainu from wearing earrings,

the eyebrows and forehead were also sometimes

to the front. Others have two- to three-inch

tattooed (fig. 45.33). While the age at which a

strips of cloth hanging at the front and back

girl was tattooed varied from region to region,

of both ears. Generally cotton cloth was used,

the first part of the tattoo design was generally

but Chinese silk, imported through the

applied at the age of six or seven. After the

Santan trade, appears on some early speci-

fig. 45.31 have engraved brass

but the Ainu continued to import the
materials needed to make them from
the Asian continent and Japan.
(AMNH 70/4040A, B; BMS C18767)

45/ CLOTHING AND ORNAMENTATION

325

in dances it was thought that they warded off
evil spirits. Emusbat were valued accordingly
and elicited feelings of reverence and awe.
The practice of making exciting and
creative garments is now enjoying a vigorous
revitalization after a period in the mid¬
45.32 Tattoo Knife

mens. Because a man's sapanpe was used for a

twentieth century when very few garments

The Ainu considered tattoos to be a

long period of time, it was refurbished

were made. Ainu women are examining

occasionally with new inaw-kike.

traditional designs, materials, and construc¬

mark of a woman's beauty, and when
her tattoos were completed in her late

The emusbat, a sword strap made from

tion techniques by studying Ainu garments

teens, she was considered ready for
marriage. In 1888 Romyn Hitchcock

woven bark fiber (fig. 45.34) is carried by

found not only in the public museums of

observed the Ainu practice of tattooing,

men, mainly at ceremonies. Men suspend the

Japan but in North America and Europe as

and he made note of the technique

sword over their shoulder so that it touches

well. We see more and more traditionally

(1891b: 442): "The tattoo marks are

the left side of the waist,- this manner of

made clothes being worn proudly at Ainu

carrying swords is very old. The weaving

celebrations, and there are competitive craft

made by cross-hatching the skin with
knives which they get from the Japa¬
nese. Into the cuts thus made the soot

technique used for this piece is complex and

shows held in several areas in Hokkaido as

of burning birchbark (kaba) is rubbed,

employs thirty-six separate warp strands. The

well as exhibitions of modern weaving held

which is collected on the bottom of a

design is woven to create contrasting black-

throughout Japan. Traditional patterns are

dish held over the fire." Hitchcock

and-white or dark-blue-and-white patterns,

also being adapted for contemporary clothi.ng

with red cotton thread also used.

designs, such as in modern vest designs for

collected this tattoo knife in Piratori,
Hokkaido. (NMNH 150715)

Swords were among Ainu men's most

both men and women that command pre¬
mium prices. There is no doubt that the

45.33 Arm Tattoos

valued treasures and were handled with

In this Ainu-e from Shimanojo

utmost care and respect. Swords were believed

future of Ainu traditional attire is safe in the

Murakami's early-nineteenth-century

to be very powerful spiritually, and when used

skilled hands of its people.

Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood, a woman
holds a mussel-shell knife; the tattoos
on her forearm and wrist are clearly
visible. Again, Romyn Hitchcock ob¬
served (1891b: 442):”The faces of the
women are disfigured by tattooing
around the mouth, the style of which
varies with the locality. Young maidens
of six or seven have a little spot on
the upper lip. As they grow older,
this is gradually extended until a
more or less broad band sur¬
rounds the mouth and extends into
a tapering curve on both cheeks
toward the ears. The arms also are
tattooed in various patterns.”
(HML)
45.34 Sword and Sword Holder
Weaving a man's sword holder
(emushat) was one of the most
challenging and important tasks an
Ainu woman, because for the
emushat was believed to be imbued
with ritual and spiritual powers
equal to those of the sword. (AMS)

326

LIVING ARTS/M

KODAMA

T

he Ainu, like many indigenous

peoples, had very few prized
personal possessions. Ainu women
held their sewing needles most

4 6/Ikupasuy:
It's Not a
Mustache Lifter!

dear,- men, while valuing their knives for secu¬
lar needs, relied completely on their ability
to talk to the gods, and that couldn't be done
without their all-important prayer sticks,
known in Ainu as ikupasuy (fig. 46.1). I have
adapted this article from one I wrote in 1942,

Fosco Maraini

relying on David Dubreuil to provide a more
contemporary perspective on the topic.
The first known mention of an ikupasuy
by a westerner dates back to February 28,
1565, when the Portuguese Jesuit Father Louis
Frois wrote a letter from Meaco (now Kyoto)
giving his superiors back home interesting

46.2

Ritual Use of the Ikupasuy

Miyamoto (whose Ainu name was
Ekashmatok), chief of the Shiraoi

news about Japan. Father Frois, who
died in 1597, was among the most
knowledgeable of the many Jesuit

Ainu in the 1950s, is seen here
dipping his ikupasuy into a fuk/just

priests who resided in Japan during
46.1

before sprinkling some drops of

the latter half of the sixteenth

millet beer on the altar (nusa)

century and some of his works offer

culture, Lyman bought at least thirty objects,

outside his house in 1954.

fascinating reading even today.

which he donated to the Smithsonian Institu¬

Among other intriguing bits of
information that Father Frois

purchased in Yokohama were catalogued by

conveyed on this occasion was a

the Smithsonian as "moustache sticks."

brief passage on the people of Ezo
(present-day Fdokkaido), the large
island at the northern end of the

missionary who lived among the Ainu in

Japanese archipelago. He states: 'To

Hokkaido for sixty-three years (1877-1940),

the north of Japan about 300 leagues

continued the use of this misnomer. His

from the city of Meaco there lies a

terminology may have been due to sheer

vast land inhabited by men of

conservative spirit in employing a term that

the forests. These people cover their

was by then outmoded. Nevertheless, it's

bodies, which are very hairy, with

strange that Batchelor, who wrote many

animal skins,- they have wondrous

articles and books on the religion and culture

which they lift with a small wand
when they are about to drink"

emphasis on the religious significance of the

Over the next few centuries the
Ikupasuy, the Ainu prayer

misconceptions about the name and

stick, is used in sake-drinking

use of the prayer stick spread

rituals to help send a man’s

throughout the western world. In

prayers to the gods. Although

Europe a tradition of using this term

small and deceptively simple,
these implements embody

followed Frois, and at some- point this
idea was transferred to North

much of Ainu art and
imagination. (PMC 51648)

of the Ainu, including an Ainu-EnglishJapanese dictionary, did not place more

(Bickmore 1868).
Ikupasuy

The Reverend John Batchelor (1 8541944), an Anglican Church of England

beards and enormous mustaches,

46.1

tion later that year. Two of the items he

ikupasuy, for he certainly understood the
importance to Ainu of libation offerings to
the gods using the ikupasuy-.
It is a curious instrument and [is] only
called into use when drinking. Its purpose
is two-fold. The men invariably use it
when they are at worship, for with the end
of it they offer drops of wine to the gods
to whom they pray [figs. 46.2, 46.6, 46.7],

America, where its use may have

Further, the moustache lifters are used to

been initiated by Benjamin Smith

keep the mustache out of the cup while

Lyman. On a trip to Japan in 1876,

the men drink (Batchelor 1 892: 77).

Lyman, an American geologist hired

Further evidence of Batchelor's knowledge

by the Japanese government,

about the social and religious nature of the

traveled through several areas of

implement is contained in Smithsonian curator

Honshu and Hokkaido. Intrigued by

Romyn Hitchcock's report of a conversation

the uniqueness of Ainu material

with Batchelor (Hitchcock 1891a):

46/ IKUPASUY SYMBOLISM

327

of the liquor. But that is far from being its
real function. In recent times they have
become generally known as drinking
sticks. . . . But they are really prayer sticks,
as I discovered many years ago. [Although]
sometimes they are used as libationwands ... all elders consider the prayer
46.3

stick as a sacred object, a messenger of
Offertory Ware

prayer (1962: 39).

In communicating with the gods,

Simply put, the ikupasuy functions

the Ainu most often send their
prayers through the ikupasuy, prayer
stick. The ikupasuy is dipped into a

primarily as a sacred prayer stick, a mediator
Mr. Batchelor tells us that in drinking sake

to deliver messages between the user and the
gods (kamuy), because the Ainu believe they

mild offertory liquor (figure 46.5),

[using the prayer stick], three drops must

such as millet beer or later,- sake, to

be given to the fire goddess, Fuchi, three

anoint the object of the prayer. The

thrown toward the east window [god’s

vessel holding the liquor is a

window], and three toward the northeast

lacquerware cup, tuki, which is placed
on a separate lacquerware saucer
stand, seen here. (For a complete set
of offertory ware, see figure 23.9.)
These items, which were obtained
from the Japanese through trade, had
by the 1600s assumed a central place
in Ainu ritual. (BMS 18765, 18767)

corner of the hut, where the Aino

can not pray directly to them (Sasaki 1995:
56). It has a secondary use as a libation wand
to administer a liquid offering: in older times

treasures are kept, and then three drops

a very mild home-brewed millet beer was

must be offered to any special god, for

used,- it has been replaced with commercially

whose benefit the libations are offered or

distilled sake.

to whom the Ainu are paying worship.

The literature is confusing, however, and

FJitchcock also reported (1891 b: 459-61)

even Munro appears to contradict himself, for

seeing several variations of the ritual during his

he sometimes uses the terms prayer stick and
libation wand interchange¬
ably. Early in his book
Ainu Creed and Cult (1962),
Munro states that "In
prayer an elder may say
that his language is
faulty, but that the prayer
stick will convey his
meaning correctly"
(1962: 40), while later, in
a chapter describing the
housewarming ceremony,
he states that the
respected elder adminis¬
tering the rite asks the

46.4

46.4

fire goddess "to inspire

46.5
Neil Munro and Patient

Neil Munro, a Scottish physician who lived
with the Ainu in Nibutani from 1930 to

one-month stay among the Ainu in the summer

the libation wand as her messenger so that,

of 1888. Similar information is recorded in

should the prayers be unsuitably worded, the

FHitchcock's accession records for specimen

meaning will become clear to the good kamui"

1942. ministered to them spiritually as

150664: "Moustache stick used to make libations

(1962: 78). Even though Munro occasionally

their belief system, and his 1962 book

of sake to the gods, and also to raise the

uses the term "libation wand," the meaning is

Ainu Creed and Cult explored Ainu ritual.

moustache while drinking sake” (1891b: 493).

clearly that of a prayer stick used for convey¬

well as with medicine. He also studied

He is seen here comforting a patient.

46.5

The first western person to have

ing prayers to the gods. As a mediator,

understood the real meaning of the ikupasuy

a libation wand would not alter words,

may have been the Scottish doctor Neil

content, or meaning.

Tuki mo Ikupasuy

Ainu protocol calls for the ikupasuy to be

The etymology of the word ikupasuy is

laid across the top of the tuki with its

Munro (fig. 46.4), who studied the Ainu for

pointed end to the left. When one begins

many years before directly ministering to

the ritual, the tuki is grasped with the left

their health needs in the Nibutani area from

ing liquors. In Ainu pasuy means chopsticks,

1930 until his death in 1942. Munro wrote of

and the Japanese word for these utensils is

the ikupasuy-.

basbi. While some Ainu scholars have postu¬

hand and the ikupasuy between the right
thumb and forefinger. The pointed end of
the prayer stick is dipped into the liquid,

intriguing. Iku in Ainu means to drink inebriat¬

gestures are made toward the god, and a

I cannot say who first named them

lated a connection between pasuy and basbi, the

few drops of liquid are sprinkled in the

moustache-lifters, but it was one of those

reasoning is unclear because chopsticks come

appropriate direction.

guesses, based on imperfect acquaintance,

in sets of two, whether they are Chinese,

repeated in popular writings. .

Japanese, or Ainu in origin, while the ikupasuy

It is

sometimes used to keep the moustache out

328

LIVING ARTS/F. MARAINI

is a single piece of wood. In some collections

there are old examples of ikupasuy made of
natural tree limbs that have forked double
branches close together, suggesting chopsticks,
but it is perhaps too easy to draw what seems
to be an obvious connection. Sometimes,
however, chopsticks have been substituted
when a "normal" ikupasuy wasn't available. For
example, after the funeral of famed Ainu artist
Bikky Sunazawa (193 1-89), relatives and
friends held an impromptu ceremony in the
Ainu tradition to honor Sunazawa, but because
no ikupasuy were available, chopsticks were
used (D. Dubreuil, private communication,
May 1994). In other situations even a tobacco
pipe would be used as a substitute (Kayano
46.8 Offering Prayers
Kayano-ekashi is shown performing
a 1971 iyomante ceremony. This

1978: 243-44). This usage indicates that the
intent was more important than the form and
the prayer more significant than the artifact

photograph is taken from the point
of view of the bear as Kayano
offers libations and prayers over
the bear's cage.

that conveyed it.
Because the Ainu do not pray directly to
the gods, the ikupasuy acts as an intermediary

46.8

shinnurappa, a memo¬
rial ritual for Ainu
ancestors. During
these and many other
ceremonies the
ikupasuy is used
extensively. As might
be expected, the
actual time given to
prayer while using the
prayer stick is far
greater than the time
it takes to sprinkle the
required offering of
sake on the fire,

46.7

46.6

between the gods and the worshipper in a

sacred ritual carved staffs (inaw), or other

Two ekashi, Torizo Tanaka from Nibutani

wide variety of religious ceremonies. While

objects being offered.

and Ginosuke Kikuchi from Bihoro, offer

the Ainu had shamans who normally were

46.6, 46.7

Prayers to Fuchi

libations and prayers to Fuchi, goddess
of fire and an important protector of the

The ikupasuy is almost always used with

used to cure sickness, they were not consid¬

a lacquerware cup and holder, which are made

ered priests and did not officiate at other

by the Japanese and called by the Ainu name,

the hearth. These photos were taken in

rituals. Respected men, usually elders, con¬

tuki (fig. 46.3),- occasionally a tuki carved from

Nibutani in 1954.

ducted all ceremonies in the home and village

raw wood will be used, for instance during

and at the hunting and fishing areas.

ceremonies held while hunting or fishing.

household. Fuchi is believed to reside in

Although the Ainu had no temples or

When Ainu men hunted, a stick, similar to an

shrines, the home was considered sacred to

ikupasuy and called pushka-un-ni, was often built

a large number of gods (kamuy), the most

into the quiver, but this was not a prayer stick.

important being Fuchi, goddess of fire. The

A special prayer stick was used to pray for

home is also the location of the god's window

hunting success and thanksgiving after the

(kamuy-puyar), where the gods entered and

hunt, and it was also used to protect the

left, ceremonial items were taken in and out,

hunter and to identify him in case of death

and the head, skin, and meat of the bear were

(Munro 1962: 40). When Ainu traveled, a

passed during the bear-sending ceremony

small bowl without a cup-holder was fre¬

(iyomante: figs. 46.8, 46.9a-c). Another

quently used.

important ceremony held in the home is

46 / IKUPASUY SYMBOLISM

For use during ceremonies, the tuki is

329

partially filled with sake and the ikupasuy is
placed across its rim with the tapered end
pointed to the left. The user takes the tuki in
his left hand and picks up the sacred prayer
stick at its end between the thumb and fore¬
finger of his right hand. He dips the pointed
or tapered end into the sake, and with great
gentleness and reverence he slowly sprinkles
the offering on the object of worship (figs. 46.6,
46.7). When sharing the tuki and ikupasuy with
others participating in the ritual, ceremonial
etiquette demands that the prayer stick be
properly returned to the tuki and slowly and
deliberately turned until the tapered end is
pointed toward the person's left (fig. 46.5).
46.9a

This small courtesy, called pasuy-oshipi, is
characteristic of the dignified approach to
both ritual and social behavior found
throughout Ainu culture.

Types of Prayer Sticks
There are two basic types of prayer sticks. The
most common, the ikupasuy, resembles a wide
letter-opener with design elements carved in
relief. Averaging one foot (thirty centimeters)
in length and one to one-and-a-half inches
(four centimeters) wide, the overall thickness is
about one-quarter inch (one-half centimeter).
It is not uncommon, however, for some design
elements to rise above the surface by a half¬
inch (one centimeter) or more. These elements
feature a multitude of subjects, anything from
46.9b

bears to mountains.
The second type, kike-ush-pasuy, is
generally used only for specific ceremonies
such as the bear-sending ceremony (iyomante),
and is thought to be more sacred, producing a
more intense spirit (ramat). Always made of
raw wood, usually willow, their most distin¬
guishing characteristic is the wood shavings
(kike) that remain attached to the prayer stick
(fig. 46.10) (H. Kono 1933a: 366-68). The
prayer stick will normally only have ritual
signs—family crests (itokpa) and/or abstract
designs with private meaning to an individual
(sbiroshi)—carved into its surface. After the
ceremony the kike-ush-pasuy is usually ritually
46.9c

46.9a-c

destroyed by fire in the hearth or sometimes
attached to an upright branch of the altar

Bear-Sending Ceremony

These illustrations from a copy of

(nusa) where skulls and other body parts left

Shimanojo Murakami’s Curious Sights

over from the iyomante are placed.

of Ezo Island (1799) show three stages
of the bear-sending (iyomante)

Sueo Sugiyama (1934: 149) illustrated
and described an unusual prayer stick from

ceremony: preparations around the
bear cage (heper-set) (a); strangling the

330

Sakhalin, which he called horoka-basui, that was

bear (b); and the ceremonial feast and

carved from a branch with two natural oppos¬

celebration (c). (NMNH 395,023-25)

ing dogleg turns. Sugiyama was told that it was

LIVING ARTS/ F. MARAINI

46.11

Parts of the Ikupasuy

itokpa

itokpa

l

I

As a ritual implement the ikupasuy
has a specific structure, and each

\
1

ohontoki

section of the item is named, as

noshki
^_._n

|

j

of Ainu material culture, terminology varies
akapari
.
/ ikeshi

illustrated here. The central panel on
etu

called ohon-toki. The first carving is the itokpa,
which consists of a series of straight notches

the owner's artistic statement, while

(

X

^

>

(itokpa) is coded in the parallel cuts
at both ends of the stick. The pointed

Starting with the blunt end and working
toward the tip, the end of the ikupasuy is

the upper surface (noshki) is used for

the owner's family mark or crest

from region to region.

parunpe
shiroshi

distal end. representing a tongue,

cut across the width of the prayer stick. The
cuts, of varying lengths, are secret marks of
ownership that may have been all or part
of a family crest. This element is one of the

sometimes carries a small v-shaped

supposed to have been used in a special but

most consistent parts of the ikupasuy. It is

god); this surface may also have one

not-specified bear-related ritual: if the prayer

extremely rare for the itokpa to not be present,

or more incised shiroshi, emblematic

stick were reversed and the blunt end dipped

and some argue that without the itokpa the

into ceremonial liquor, it would produce some

object is not an ikupasuy. There are, however,

kind of curse. While this tantalizing bit of

examples of smoothly carved sticks that only

birds, bears, and orca fins, (after

hearsay is interesting, unfortunately there is no

have the pointed tip, so perhaps it's a re¬

Maraini 1942)

information to corroborate it, and this particu¬

gional phenomenon In some cases the

lar prayer stick is thought to have been de¬

carving of the itokpa runs into the middle

stroyed by fire during World War II along with

element's design, making it difficult or im¬

most of Sugiyama's Ainu collection.

possible to differentiate.

parunpe (representing the tongue of

marks of animals or creatures which
are frequently difficult to interpret. In
some cases they definitely represent

The middle element (noshki) occupies

Ikupasuy Nomenclature

the largest surface of the prayer stick and is

Figure 46 I 1 identifies the various parts of the

the zone where the artist can demonstrate his

ikupasuy using the type found in the FJidaka

creativity. The designs encompass a vast

region of the Saru River,- an Ainu name for

array of extraordinary and complex ideas and

each element is given but as with many items

motifs, ranging from extremely abstract
geometrical compositions that appear to be
floral in concept (fig. 46.16) to family crests.

46.10

Inaw and Kike-Ikupasuy

Animals such as the killer whale (the god of

Inaw are sacred shaved sticks

the ocean) and other objects are also

that symbolize birds, which act as

realistically depicted (figs. 46.12, 46.1 3).

messengers to carry the host’s
prayers to the gods. Inaw take

Other elements important to Ainu belief

different forms depending on the

system and/or subsistence needs are included:

god being addressed, and each

bears, bear heads, bear tracks, bears in cages,

individual god has a specific type

and bears laid out as in the iyomante. Other

of inaw associated with it. Kike-

ikupasuy, prayer sticks with inaw-

significant animals such as otter, fox, seals,

kike carved into their upper

other whales, salmon, swordfish, cranes, and

surface (c, d), are used only for

snakes are carved, along with boats, houses,

the iyomante and then are

swords, tuki (fig. 46.15), and mountains.

destroyed. Other ikupasuy (a, b)

There seems to be no restriction on the

may be reused as long as the

subject matter in the area of the noshki—one

owner wishes. (Maraini 1942)

extreme example of artistic freedom is an
ikupasuy with two small airplanes carved on
it—but it is extremely rare to find a prayer
stick without some carving in this narrow and
confined area.
While their relationship with the Japanese
has always been tenuous at best and hostile at
worst, Ainu sometimes carved decorative
elements in the area of the noshki which to
them were symbolic of the Japanese, for
example, Japanese swords. While this par¬
ticular example may simply reflect the fact
that the Ainu coveted swords and scabbards,
it is more difficult to explain such objects as
Japanese family crests, or kuwasaki, hornlike

46/ IKUPASUY SYMBOLISM

331

46.12

46.13

Orca Symbols

Orca Shiroshi

Ethnographic information from the

This ikupasuy has a very

Ainu and inspection of hundreds of

recognizable orca mark on its

ikupasuy have shown that many

bottom, while the upper surface

shiroshi marks are abstracted

carries carvings of a bear and

versions of one of a few types of

three salmon. (MPM N17302)

basic animal symbols. The most
common image—the orca back fin
and abstractions based on it—is
widely understood by Ainu to
represent this animal. Other forms,
however, are less well understood,

46.13

(after Maraini 1942)

** $5
JUL..

X JL

44m

46.12

ornaments often seen on samurai helmets.
That the samurai who defeated the Ainu in all
major battles with the Japanese would be so
honored on ikupasuy is intriguing, but symbols
of adversaries are also found on artifacts from
other cultures,- for example, the Plains Indians
of North America sometimes depicted the
American flag in their beadwork.
The next decorated area past the noshki is
another itokpa, which may be the same as the
first itokpa or may be different. These can be
viewed as two separate parts of the same secret
mark of ownership. Depending on region, near
the tip of the prayer stick a small triangular
incision called the parunpe, or tongue, is carved.
While some are inclined to say this serves to
collect a small amount of sake to be sprinkled
46.14

on the object of worship, others, like Munro,

Lacquered Ikupasuy

Ainu do not generally lacquer

believed that it was a "tongue" that helped

ikupasuy themselves; rather,

speak reverently to the gods. Most Ainu who

they carve the forms and

express an opinion on this matter today sup¬

arrange for the lacquer to be

port the latter belief (Chisato Dubreuil, private

applied by Japanese artisans.
Other than this special and

communication, May 1989). The parunpe ap¬

rather unusual finish, these

pears on the front or the back of the ikupasuy

implements are similar to the

depending on region.

more common forms with

Shiroshi are present only on the back of

natural finishes. This illustration

the ikupasuy. In a study of three hundred

was prepared by Japanese artist

ikupasuy (Maraini 1942: 43-77), only 42

Yonu Makino from lacquered
specimens in Japanese

percent were found to have the shiroshi

collections. (Maraini 1942)

mark(s), while other studies have shown even
fewer instances of such carving. Interestingly,
research has shown that most shiroshi appear
to be related to the god of the sea, the killer
whale (repun-kamuy),- the bear (kimun-kamuy),

332

LIVING ARTS/ F. MARAINI

46.15 Ikupasuy with Turn Image
This unusual ikupasuy with a tuki
carved in the middle of it was
collected by Frederick Starr in Piratori
in 1910. It is certainly not meant as
a joke or visual pun, but the precise
symbolism is elusive; it may have
been the owner's representation of
the unending nature of the ritual
cycle. (BMA 12.282)

the Ainu's most important god, and other
influential gods are rarely seen. While I have
found 1 10 variations of the sign of the killer
whale (Maraini 1942: 121-23) and Chisato
Dubreuil has found two more (1995: 522),
I have only found seven bear-related symbols
(kimun-shiroshi), four related to birds (chikapkatnuy), and two to the sun (cbup-kamuy).
Lastly, the tip consists of the point (ikesbi);
the sides of the point (etu), or nose,- and the
akapari, a slightly concave area that narrows to
a point and may be carved to serve as a recep¬
tacle for a small amount of sake. The meanings
of other named parts appear to be lost.
Although the overwhelming majority of
prayer sticks do not have a surface treatment
other than carvings, a fairly small number
have a thick lacquer finish applied to them
(fig. 46.14). It appears that such lacquerwork
was done by the Japanese in the past, but
the practice of using Japanese techniques or
artisans for ikupasuy has fallen out of favor.
In fact, no contemporary carved prayer sticks
with a lacquered surface treatment are known,
although the wood is occasionally stained.
The significance, if any, between lacquered
versus unlacquered ikupasuy is not known,
46.16

other than that the Ainu liked shiny objects.

Three Ikupasuy

A variety of floral decorations to

While there are hundreds of ikupasuy in

ikupasuy are seen in these three

museum and private collections, acquisition

specimens collected by Frederick Starr

hasn't always been easy. In 1878 Isabella

from Piratori and Porasaru in 1910;

Bird, a wealthy and adventurous woman from

other styles emphasize geometric or
sculptural forms. (BMA 12.309,

England, spent a month living with the Ainu.

12.248, 12.302)

On August 23 she wrote from Piratori:

4 6/ IKUPASUY SYMBOLISM

333

46.17

Fantastic Ikupasuy

A small percentage of ikupasuy take
unusual naturalistic forms where art
and abstraction imitate life, as in this
specimen made from a stick which has
been encircled by a strangling vine.
(MPM 17000)

46.18

Three Ikupasuy

I tried to buy the sake-sticks with which

tourist shops. Although carvings resembling

Some of the earliest ikupasuy in

they make libations to the gods, but they

ikupasuy can be found, I stress that these only

American museums are held by the

said it was "not their custom" to part with

resemble ikupasuy because they are made by

Peabody Museum, Harvard University.

the sake-stick of any living man, however,

These examples were collected by

this morning Shinondi [an Ainu man she

Alexander Agassiz in 1875 and 1893

befriended] has brought me, as a very

from Nemuro, Hokkaido. One is
lacquer-coated and has two snakelike

valuable present, the stick of a dead man!
(1881:246)

images with hooks or fins at one end;
another has a carving of a bird in the
center flanked by geometric and
fishscale panels and two circular yinyang symbols; and the third features a

Japanese and the Ainu do not consider them
to be sacred (D. Dubreuil, private communi¬
cation, May 1998).
Today modern young Ainu, like their
ancestors, make prayer sticks to use in age-

Later she wrote about death customs

old ceremonies like the iyomante, traditional

and the objects that are placed with a

house-raising, or boat-launchings—it's truly

deceased man for use in the other world.

an exciting rebirth. As Shigeru Kayano,

complex geometric relief carving with

These include "... his knife and sake-stick,

one of the first of contemporary Ainu who

incised decoration. (PMC 51643,

and, if he were a smoker, his smoking appara¬

worked tirelessly to preserve Ainu tradition,

51647,51648)

tus" (1881: 282). Today it is extremely rare,

states unequivocally, the sacred ikupasuy is

if not impossible, to see contemporary Ainu-

a living thing with a soul (1978: 241-44).

made prayer sticks for sale in any of the Ainu

It's definitely not a mustache lifter!

334

LIVING ARTS/ F. MARAINI

N

ative art has traditionally been

47 Ainu
Journey:

art created by anonymous
people, primarily because artists

by individuals for personal enhancement and

in traditional societies did not

was typical of the factors that impeded the

need to sign their works,- their identities were

development of Ainu art from its traditional

readily apparent to villagers who saw the

roots into twentieth-century forms.

objects they made every day. Anthropologists

In traditional times Ainu art communi¬

and museum curators have compounded the

cated core features of identity and ethnicity.

problem of identifying these artists by

The distinctive style of decorative arts that

focusing their interests more on the collective

was displayed on clothing, tools, and body

Tourist Art

concept of "culture" than on its individual

ornamentation was often described by early

expression. Early Ainu art conforms to this

travelers and explorers to Ezo along with their

to Fine Arts

pattern: of the fifteen or twenty thousand

bear ceremonies and reverence for nature

Ainu objects in the worlds museums, very few

(S. Kodama 1970a, b; Yamakawa 1980: 79-

can be attributed to known individuals.

80). Although Ainu material culture was fre¬

From

Chisato O. Dubreuil

The passage from artistic anonymity to

47.1

limited artistic production to the family
economy rather than allowing it to be utilized

Chopstick Case and

Cigarette Holder

Early in the nineteenth century, as
the work of Ainu carvers gained
popularity, they were commissioned

quently cited for its artistic design, Ainu art

personal recognition as fine artists coincided

did not become a subject of professional

in Ainu society, as in many other cultures,

study until the publication of Ainu no mon'yo

with major changes in economic practices,

(Ainu design motifs,- Sugiyama 1926). This

religious beliefs, and social structure. When

was followed by a three-volume work, Ainu

Ainu began to trade or sell their everyday

geijutsu (Ainu art, Sugiyama andKindaichi

objects to neighbors centuries ago, the

1941, 1942, 1943) that surveyed Ainu textile

creators of these utilitarian objects began to

art, woodcarving, metalwork, and lacquer-

recognize them as a means to acquire other

ware. These works brought Ainu art to the

goods. When Hokkaido tourism was pro¬

attention of scholars and laid a foundation for

to produce such works as this

moted by the new Meiji government after

professional study of Ainu art as a folk genre,

chopstick case and wooden cigarette

1890, it brought new opportunities to Ainu

but the complex of Ainu traditional, tourist,

holder, which have Japanese form but

artists, but tourist art was rarely signed

and fine arts that has evolved from traditional

are decorated with Ainu designs.

because it was created as a commodity,- its

roots has not yet been studied or researched

signature was its Ainu style or subject matter.

in detail. Indeed, many Japanese art historians

Around this time, a very few Ainu
artists also began to sign their work
(a practice that unfortunately was not

While freedom of expression and pride in

and contemporary arts specialists continue to

practiced on a routine basis until

authorship is not a precondition to creating

classify all Ainu art in the ethnic or folk art

much later). An inscription inside the

fine art, it often accompanies its develop¬

genre. In part this is a result of Japanese colo¬

lid of this chopstick case identifies

ment. Prohibition on the use of animal

nial policies and social attitudes, which were

representations, which was dictated by

marked by disrespect of all things Ainu, in¬

fundamental Ainu religious

cluding their culture, literature, and art. Cen¬

the Japanese owner, “Mr. Ohnishi,
April 1856, East Ezo”; the name of
the Ainu artist is given as “Itakiekaru
from Sarunkur” (the Saru River area).

beliefs and social structure,

turies of discrimination do not disappear

This case was acquired for the

overnight. However, a sign of improvement

Brooklyn Museum of Art by Stewart

can be found in recent exhibitions dealing

Culin in 1912. The cigarette holder,

with Ainu contemporary artists: an exhibition

which seems to never have been

of Ainu design at the Kokuritsu Minzogaku

used, was purchased by Frederick
Starr in Porusaru in 1904 while he

Hakubutsukan in Osaka (1993),- an exhibition

was collecting for the Louisiana

of contemporary Ainu woodcarving at the

Purchase Centennial Exposition.

Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum in 1993,- and

(BMA 12.160, 12.173)

a 1994 Hokkaido exhibition organized as part
of the United Nations' International Year of
Indigenous Peoples.
In recent years Ainu fine art has evolved
from traditional and tourist art, and Ainu
artists have found new outlets and recognition
for creative expression. This essay chronicles
the historical and artistic evolution of Ainu
art as a function of Ainu economic survival. I
will show how Ainu tourist art was officially
incorporated into the development of tourism
in Hokkaido after the Meiji Restoration in

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

335

1 868, focusing on the Asahikawa region as

eth-century artists, most of them also from

an example of deliberate artistic develop¬

Asahikawa. Among the artists featured,

ment. This is followed by discussion of the

special attention is given to Bikky Sunazawa,

emergence of Ainu fine arts seen through the

whose life and works epitomize his people's

life and works of several pioneering twenti¬

struggles and represent their undying spirit.

From Maritime Trade to Tourist Art
>^Vmong the earliest European reports of

Isabella L. Bird, a doughty Englishwoman

Ainu art is an account from 1643 by a Dutch

who wrote a book about her travels in Hok¬

sea merchant of "finely carved heads of either

kaido, described her efforts to purchase Ainu

a lion or a dragon" on Ainu grave-site struc¬

handcrafts in her diary for August 23, 1878:

tures (Kitagamae 1983: 80). Dutch records

... I was anxious to help them by buying

also note the existence of a flourishing Ainu-

some of their handiwork ... a tobacco box

directed maritime trade, which brought Ainu

and pipe-sheath, and knives with carved

into contact with Japanese and various

handles and scabbards, and for three of these

peoples of the lower Amur River and Asian
mainland, both as suppliers of goods and as

I offered 2'A dollars . . . [the Ainu said] they
were not worth more than 1 dollar 10 cents,
and they would sell them for that, and I

middlemen traders (ibid.: 43,-Takakura 1960).

could not get them to take more ... I [also]

Trade supplied the Ainu with foreign materials

bought a bow and three poisoned arrows,

that were incorporated into the design of

two reed-mats, with a diamond pattern on

clothing and implements. When the

them in reeds stained red, some knives with

Tokugawa Shogunate systematized Ainu trade

sheaths, and a bark-cloth dress. I tried to

after 1603, forcing the Ainu to deal with their
agents at Matsumae, Ainu contacts abroad

buy the sake-sticks [ikupasuy] with which
they make libations to their gods, but they
said it was "not their custom" to part with

began to decline and became increasingly

the sake-stick of any living man . . . For

focused on interaction with Japanese in

"indoor recreation" men carve tobacco

Hokkaido (Asaji, Miyatake, and Nakama

boxes, knife-sheaths, sake-sticks, and

1993: 32-35). By the mid-1700s these

[weaving] shuttles, and the women weave

interactions had become based more on cash
than barter, and in addition to selling their
services for wages, Ainu began offering

a nearly indestructible cloth . . . for barter,
and the lower class of Japanese are
constantly to be seen wearing the product
of Ainu industry (Bird 1881: 64-67).

artistically designed woodcrafts and attush
(bark-fiber) clothing for sale (Yamakawa 1980:
79-80). By 1818 the Ainu were supplying
many types of household equipment to the
growing number of Japanese in Hokkaido
(Takakura 1942: 170), and well-known Ainu
47.2, 47.3

New Spoons and Figurines

artists were often given commissions for such

As Ainu artists began to produce items

specialty items as chopstick cases, cigarette

for new markets they adapted old

holders, brush-holders and towel hangers

forms to the tastes of a new clientele.
Kurile and Hokkaido Ainu appealed to
Japanese taste by making spoon handles
and bowls that simulate bamboo and

(fig. 47.1, R Saito 1994: 147).
With the opening of Hokkaido during
the Meiji Restoration, which began in 1868,

seashells. Sakhalin Ainu refugees, who

the Ainu were forced to assimilate rapidly into

had been resettled in Hokkaido,

Japanese society, and the practice of Ainu

transformed their traditional nipopo

customs, religion, and language was forbid¬

(“wooden baby”) figurines, previously
used as children's amulets, into a new

den. The government demanded the Ainu

type that became a popular early-

take up agriculture and used land allotments

twentieth-century tourist item. This

as inducements. However, drastic changes in

spoon was collected in Etorofu, Kuriles,

their way of life and receipt of poor-quality

by Romyn Hitchcock in 1888; the pair of

land kept most Ainu from becoming success¬

figures was made by an Ainu artist
named Suzuki from Asahikawa in the
1960s. (NMNH 150722; KM)

ful farmers, and many had to supplement
their earnings by selling carvings and textile
works (fig. 47.2).

336

LIVING ARTS/C.

47.3

DUBREUIL

lowed to keep their profits, but in 1917
Asahikawa appropriated 1,000 yen from the
Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act
budget and forced the Ainu to sell their
products to the city, paying the Ainu from this
account (K. Saito 1979: 4). The city even
forced the Ainu to buy wood for carving
through the city forest office (Ishijima 1980a: 3).
This symbiotic relationship could have been
47.4-47.6

Fetish to Fashion

The carving of bears underwent a

Asahikawa: Japanese Tourism

arranged to enhance Ainu profits, but instead

and Tourist Art

Japanese merchants benefited disproportion¬

In the 1880s the Japanese constructed a rail¬

ately. In 1917 the city bought 2,537 pieces for

remarkable evolution during the first
half of the twentieth century.

way network in Hokkaido. Soon the govern¬

442 yen, creating a large surplus in their bud¬

produced exclusively for such

ment began to promote Hokkaido's wild,

get. The Ainu were encouraged to carve more,

religious objects as prayer sticks

unspoiled environment and its Ainu people as

but it was not until 1924 that they succeeded

Traditionally, bear carvings were

(ikupasuy) and men's headdresses;

tourist attractions. Having been defeated

in carving enough to exhaust the budget.

militarily and economically, the Ainu were

Around this time the Asahikawa Ainu began

they used as fetishes to promote

now forced to play "Ainu" for the tourists

carving the figures known as "Ainu dolls”

fertility among bears (fig. 47.4).

(Asaji, Miyatake, and Nakama 1993: 61).

(nipopo) (fig. 47.3) even though making human

only the Sakhalin Ainu made fullfigured bear carvings (inoka), which

When tourists began to travel to Ainu
homelands in the early 1920s, Ainu
began carving bears for sale to
visitors, but their stiff, ungainly
results soon earned the nickname of

When Japanese began to settle in
Asahikawa in large numbers around 1890,

Ainu had little choice but to engage in this

they moved into a city whose infrastructure

work because they were financially depen¬

had been built by a combination of Japanese

dent on the government (Ishijima 1980b: 3).

“pig-bears” (fig. 47.5). During the

and Ainu prisoners and by Japanese soldiers

twenties and thirties bear carving

sent (from 1875 to 1904) to develop farmland

advanced rapidly, and Umetaro

and defend Hokkaido against Russia. In 1899,

Matsui emerged as the premier artist

images was against Ainu traditional beliefs,- the

a year after the railway reached Asahikawa,

carving in a highly naturalistic manner
(fig. 47.6). His work won many

the Seventh Japanese Army Division

awards and in 1938 he was chosen

arrived. Japanese businessmen found a

to carve a bear for Emperor Hirohito.

good market among the newcomers for

Following this official recognition,

selling Ainu platters, bowls, spoons, and

many Japanese began to acquire Ainu

textiles, and they promoted sales by having
47.5

bear carvings as souvenirs. (ACM
4449, 4436, 12.3.1.1)

local Ainu present carving and weaving
demonstrations. One of the first shops to
open, in 1900, was the Yamada Shuchin-dou
(Yamada Collectible Curio Shop,- Ishijima
1980a, b). Soon after, Ainu from Chikabumi
village near Asahikawa opened their own
shop in order to bypass merchants and sell
directly to the public.
At first the Chikabumi Ainu were al¬

Bear Carving
The most prevalent early Ainu tourist art is
the carved wooden bear. Traditionally the
image of the bear, kimun-kamuy (god of the
mountains), appeared in miniature form only
on prayer sticks (ikupasuy), the man's ceremo¬
nial headdress, and a few other special
religious objects. The Ainu had not made
larger secular images of bears previously, and
by tradition such depictions were stylized,
not in realistic poses. Only the Sakhalin Ainu
had produced bear images (fig. 47.4),- these
figures, used in the bear-sending ceremony
to promote fecundity of bears, were approxi¬
mately four to six inches (ten to fifteen
centimeters) high and covered with a female
bear's genital skin and/or pubic hair (M. Kono
1985: 15). Consequently, when Hokkaido
Ainu first began to carve bears commercially,
their attempts were unsuccessful and farfrom-faithful representations of the animal.
These ungainly creations (fig. 47.5) have

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

337

best carvers were able to substantially increase
their personal income. Matsui received a special
award in 1933 at the Ainu Art Craft Exhibition
sponsored by the Hokkaido Prefectural Office
(Arai 1992: 83), and while this was a great
honor, it was far surpassed when Matsui was
asked to carve a bear for presentation to
Emperor Hirohito on his visit to Hokkaido in
1936. The publicity generated by this event
instantly made Chikabumi bear carvings
famous. Sales of all Ainu tourist art increased
generally, and Matsui began to sign his work
from that point on (Ishijima 1981: 11).
Around the 1930s Kensei Kato (1 894—
1966), a Japanese sculptor from the Tokyo Art
School, was invited to Asahikawa to give Ainu
carvers guidance and training. This was the first
time that Ainu carvers had received formal
training in the use of tools and in design and
composition. This experience had a positive
impact and helped Chikabumi gain the domi¬
nant market share over other Ainu tourist
areas. Armed with the confidence created by
the Matsui presentation and new-found pro¬
duction and marketing skills, Chikabumi Ainu
began traveling to other tourist areas to sell
carvings and give demonstrations.

47.7

During the war years the market for
tourist art was curtailed, but immediately after
the war the Asahikawa Folkcraft Organization
47.7, 47.8

Miniature Totem Poles

The Ainu have always been interested
in the wood carvings of other native
peoples, especially those of the

been called "pig bears” or "alligator bears”

began producing woodcarvings to respond to a

(Arai 1992: 82).

new market opportunity: American Occupation

The origin of commercial Ainu bear

Forces (Ohtsuka 1982: 16, 17). In addition to

carving has been a matter of dispute that re¬

producing the beautiful carved platters, bowls,

symbolism they did not understand but

quires further study. Some (Ohtsuka, this vol¬

and other items that they were famous for, Ainu

which they admired as works of art. The

ume) claim that it was stimulated by examples

now began to carve electric lamps, bookends,

miniature pole on the left, carved by

of bear carvings that Japanese farmers in

magazine racks, decorative forks and spoons,

Koyama and acquired in Akan.

Yakumo, Hokkaido, brought home from Eu¬

and other everyday items. Business was so good

Northwest Coast Indians whose

Hokkaido, in 1986, shows a bear with

rope to show Ainu carvers,- others claim that

that they experimented with exporting tourist

was stained black to simulate totem

the bear-carving tradition began independently

art to the United States (Ishijima 1980a: 4).

poles made from argillaceous rocks by

among the Ainu of the Asahikawa region.

Almost all of these items featured bears or

Canada’s Haida Indians. The pole on

Whatever the case, bear carving among the

traditional Ainu designs (fig. 47.8).

a cub, an owl, and an Ainu woman. It

the right, by an unknown artist, features
an Ainu man and woman and a bear,
rendered in bright, decorative colors.

Chikabumi Ainu progressed rapidly, and by the
early 1920s Umetaro Matsui (1901-49)

Throughout this period the Asahikawa
Ainu maintained a leading position in the

emerged as the most celebrated Ainu bear

production and sales of tourist art and were its

carver in Hokkaido. Even as a young man,

largest wholesalers. Even Shiraoi, today's

American soldiers who occupied

Matsui carved bears that were more lifelike

best-known Ainu tourist village, bought its

Small totem poles with Ainu motifs
were probably first carved to sell to

Hokkaido after World War II. Model

than those of other carvers, in part because he

bear carvings from Asahikawa until the 1950s.

totem poles continue to be a small but

had hunted bears in the wild, knew them as a

Other Ainu tourist resorts such as Soun-kyo,

important part of contemporary Ainu

respected and formidable foe, and wanted his

and most of all Akan, were also greatly

carvings to render them in their natural condi¬

influenced by the Asahikawa Ainu, and in

tion (fig. 47.6). Eventually Matsui became

1962 Nibutani Ainu also took up the bear¬

museum compounds. (Dubreuil

immortalized as a "legendary Ainu person" for

carving industry (Ohtsuka 1982: 17).

Collection)

his bear-carving skills (Arai 1992: 82-84).

tourist art production. Today such
tourist areas as Akan and Shiraoi have
full-scale Ainu-style totem poles in their

338

While producing tourist art was mod¬

By 1932 Ainu carving skills and market

estly successful for some Ainu men, the more

development had improved to the point that the

creative, skilled artists soon grew impatient

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

carving the limited choice of subjects for the

was respected in Hokkaido as its foremost

tourist market,- they wanted to produce art

bear carver during the 1930s and 1940s, but

that was respected as art, not as koijei (handi¬

he was never accepted as an artist by the

craft) or Ainu tourist art. Penetrating the

contemporary Japanese art world.

Japanese fine-art market proved very difficult,

In traditional indigenous societies,

however, because the discrimination that

artistic practitioners were usually restricted

blocked Ainu participation in other areas of

to gender-related areas, and the Ainu were

society was perhaps even more rampant in the

no different: carving was normally the men's

elitist Japanese art world. Most of Japan's

prerogative, and textile production was

successful artists had been trained prior to

generally the domain of women. There are

World War II by prestigious art schools or

examples of women who carved tourist art

were apprenticed to master artists or teachers.

pieces to help support their families, but by

Securing such mentors usually required family

and large, unlike the Ainu men, women had

wealth and influence, which the Ainu lacked.

few new creative outlets during the 1930s

Before the 1950s, it was rare for an Ainu youth

and 1940s. Soon, however, both men and

to finish high school, and there were few con¬

women would have new opportunities.

temporary Ainu role models. Umetaro Matsui

Ainu Fine Art Begins
Takeki Fujito
47.9 Kuma (Bear), 1993
Takeki Fujito

o

ne of the first artists to elevate the

Asahikawa bear-carving tradition to a powerful

Takeki Fujito's understanding of and

personal expression is Takeki Fujito, who was

respect for nature are products of his

born in 1934 as the first son of Ainu carver

Ainu upbringing. Having witnessed the

Takeo Fujito. Due to the family's poverty, the

destruction of much of Hokkaido's
wilderness in the twentieth century,

young Fujito left school at the age of twelve

including the extermination of wolves

and joined his family's carving business. To

and the near-extinction of bears,

improve his skills he and his father traveled to

Fujito has dedicated his art—which

different Ainu tourist resorts in Hokkaido to

expresses a reverence for animals

learn from respected Ainu carvers, eventually

and nature—to teaching respect for
nature. His bears, like this one, seem
nearly alive. (Collection of Shigeru
Kayano)

settling in the majestic village of Akan in the
early 1950s. Shortly after his father died in

magnificently carved designs. The bear¬

1962, Fujito managed to establish his own stu¬

carving tradition is derived from that

dio, a small private museum, and a
47.10

Winter (Hibernation), 1980

Takeki Fujito

traditional craftsmanship. It's said that the
origin of bear carving began around the

gift shop.

1930s. There are various theories, for

Fujito calls himself kumahori,

example that [it] was imported from

meaning "bear carver" in

Switzerland, or started in Yakumo, and so

kamuy in Ainu, meaning “the god who

Japanese, and he takes

on. However, I must say that today's bear

is in the cave." After a long winter the

great pride in his calling:

carving began in Asahikawa. There is

A hibernating bear was called suyo-

flowers blossomed and the owls
hooted, announcing the arrival of
spring, time for the Ainu to hunt bear.
During the hunt bears were often
flushed from the apparent security of
their dens; it was such a sanctuary

Traditional [Ainu] art ob¬

no doubt that the great Ainu carvers from

jects such as the prayer stick,

my father's generation came from

spatula, and the knife sheath all

Asahikawa, like the late Umetaro Matsui.

are simply done, but they
are decorated with

I'm going to devote myself to carving
bears catching game or bears playing with
each other for the rest of my life (Chiri

that Takeki Fujito chose to depict in

and Yokoyama 1995: 118).

this work. (KM)

Fujito's bears have a strong naturalistic
47.10

quality. One example (fig. 47.9), entitled
Kuma ("bear” in Japanese), captures the
instant when a wild bear raises its paw to
attack or give warning,- Fujito used the
natural grain of the Manchurian ash to add
strength and tension By contrast, Winter
[Hibernation) (fig. 47.10) exudes the peaceful

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

339

suspension of bear life in the midst of a harsh
Hokkaido winter. Fujito's Ainu upbringing has
given him a special awareness of the environ¬
ment in which the animals he carves live.
Fujito describes himself as a bear carver,
but he is much more. His carvings capture the
spirit of the animals he creates whether they are
whales feeding on krill, a sea otter diving into
ocean surf for its dinner, eagles swooping down
to catch rabbits (fig. 47.1 1), or caribou calling
for a mate. His works beautifully communicate
the Ainu respect for animal gods (kamuy).
Fujito has also created remarkable full-size
wooden sculptures of the ekashi (male elders) and
fuchi (female elders) who transmitted the flame
of Ainu culture to him (fig. 47.12). One portrays
the late Shinchiro Hikawa (second figure from
left), who was one of last of the Ainu elders able
to perform traditional ceremonies entirely in the

47.11 Eagle Sculpture, 1978

Ainu language.

Takeki Fujito

He was a highly respected individual
47.13 Fuchi, 1993
Takeki Fujito

Fuchi, which means "respected female
elder,” is often colloquially rendered as

who realized that to survive the Ainu had to
exist in two worlds: Japan and Ainu mosir.

Fujito, his grandmother. (NME H189023)

Hokkaido and Sakhalin, the majority migrate
from the Asian continent through the Kurile
islands. Eagles became economically

While it must have been tempting to depict

important to the Ainu, who traded eagle

Hikawa in traditional Ainu clothes performing

feathers to the Japanese and Chinese in

a ceremony, Fujito immortalized him wearing

the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

“grandmother." This sculpture is Fujito’s
tribute to a very special woman: Take

While some species of eagles are native to

a modern Japanese suit with his hands in his
pockets and Ainu traditional leggings over his

Fujito carved this eagle in the act of
capturing its prey.

pants. More than a statement of cultural
blending, Hikawa Ekashi stands tall and
powerful, gazing quietly and confidently at
his viewers.
Fujito also produced a sculpture of his
late grandmother, Take Fujito, with whom he
had an especially close relationship because
he lost his mother right after his birth. In this
sculpture (fig. 47.1 3), Fujito has shown his
grandmother in traditional Ainu clothes. Her
somewhat melancholy expression seems to
take us back to the hard times when Ainu
were being forced to abandon their culture,
but her demeanor suggests the more peaceful
life the Ainu once had.
47.12 Life-sized Wooden Figures,
1991-93
Takeki Fujito
Fujito immortalized in wood four Ainu elders
because he greatly respected their roles as
keepers of the Ainu tradition. They include
from right to left: Konusa Kawakami-ekas/i/
(1993); Fusa Sugimura-fuc/ii (1992); Zejiro
Hikawa-ekas/i/(1991); and Kaneto Kawamura-

ekashi (1991). All three male elders have
passed away, but Fusa Sugimura-fuchi is still
an active cultural leader in Asahikawa,
Hokkaido. (Fujito Collection)
47.12

340

LIVING ARTS/C.

D U B REU I I

47.14 Necklace, 1968

Fujito's talent for the exacting detail that

Meiji era. Bikky's grandparents lived in a

Bikky Sunazawa

lends naturalism its power is seen in a wide

traditional Ainu home next to his parents'

The style of jewelry created by Bikky

variety of other works. He did life-sized

Japanese-style house,- his grandparents spoke

Sunazawa in the 1960s utilized

statues of Kannon (the Buddhist goddess of

to him in the Ainu language, and his parents

various Ainu designs; this necklace,

mercy), a statue of Lenin commissioned by

spoke to him in Japanese. During his first six

the Russian Embassy in Japan, and countless

years, living in a small Ainu village, he had
little contact with Japanese children. When

completed in 1968, is one example.
His jewelry styles have remained
popular, and while most artists in the

versions of his beloved bear and other

tourist industry copied his designs,

animals. While he does not often talk about

the segregated school system ended in 1937

his unique style is his legacy. Today

his work, it speaks strongly of the legacy of

and an ''equal'' educational system was made

Asahikawa Ainu bear carvers.

open to Ainu children, Bikky started elemen¬

Bikky Sunazawa

a painful period for Bikky and other Ainu

Bikky Sunazawa was unique. He was one of

children, for they were constantly ridiculed

the first Ainu artists of the post—World War II

by their Japanese classmates. In recalling his

generation to integrate the art of two worlds,

boyhood, he said, "Racial prejudice was

Japanese and Ainu. His art cannot be appreci¬

severe, and I naturally began to bate people.

the omnipresent Bikky mon'yo, or
“Bikky Patterns," are found wherever

tary school with Japanese children. This was

Ainu tourist art is sold. (KM)

ated from a narrow, one-sided (for instance,

I was much more intimate with cattle and

Ainu) point of view, nor does he fit just one

horses than with people" (Asahi Shimbun, 21

category. Bikky was a forceful proponent for

November 1960). Bikky's personal experi¬

Ainu identity, both politically and through his

ences seem to have precipitated his retreat

art. Self-taught and innovative, Bikky Sunazawa

into a private artistic world in which he

created a complex body of abstract art that was

escaped the pain of discrimination.

intricately interwoven with his equally com¬

After I finished supper in the shed, I

plex life. His fierce pride, his Ainu upbringing

began making sketches of the cattle and

and ethnicity, his parents' role as Ainu cultural

horses I had seen in the daytime. In the

leaders, and later, his own role in the fight

beginning I just wanted to draw a horse as

for Ainu rights and in ending discrimination
toward the Ainu (Siddle, this volume)—all
shaped his persona and his art.
Bikky was horn in 1931 and brought up

it was, but gradually 1 changed. It was
interesting—the more I drew, the more I
wanted to capture the essence of the
horse, not only its sturdiness or its
strength. At that time I was on the

in the Chikabumi Ainu village near

mountain, and I could not get in touch

Asahikawa. His youth was a mixture of two

with the world, even by means of a

cultures, both of which were undergoing

newspaper. With nothing to distract me,

dramatic changes: the traditional Ainu way of
life was being assimilated into a Japanese
society that had itself been experiencing
constant change since the beginning of the

the form of the animals I drew turned into
abstract forms (Yamakawa 1988: 183).
Struggling against prejudice, he realized
when he was only seventeen that the core of

47.15 a, b Ki-men (Masks), 1975
Bikky Sunazawa
Bikky’s mask series broke more new
ground for Ainu artists. Masks were
totally unknown in Ainu tradition. He
was aware of—if not influenced by—
masks of other native North Pacific
peoples, and from the beginning his
masks took an expressive mode. He
commented in an interview; “I wanted
to express both faces of masks: the
front and the back.” (Asahi Shimbun,
19 July 1976). (HOVO)

47.15b

47 / MO D ERN ART AND ARTISTS

34 i

I don't like bear carvings because they are
not the real Ainu work of Hokkaido. The
essence of Ainu art should be an expres¬
sion of the life of living things or an
expression of empathy which is received
from living things seen through the
medium of wood. The Ainu carver should
then revive these elements to modern
times (Asahi Shimbun, 22 November 1960).

Tourist Art Chances
Bikky's first contribution to Ainu art came at
age twenty-one when he created wooden
jewelry with Ainu designs to sell at the Akan
tourist resorts. He began to carve pendants
and earrings with intricate Ainu designs
(fig. 47.14) as well as the wooden rings that
had first brought him acclaim. The designs
were derived from traditional Ainu patterns
that Bikky had learned from his mother while
helping her make clothing. Bikky recalled,
My mother asked me to do the embroi¬
47.16 Bear and Hunter

his problem was his own inferiority complex.

(Ekashi), 1973

He understood that to change discrimination

Bikky Sunazawa
The artist learned about animals and
wilderness from his father, whose Ainu
name, Koa-kanno, meant "two arrows
aren't necessary,” which referred to his
prowess as a bow marksman. Bikky's
understanding of the physical and
psychological struggle between the

dery on the cbikarknrpe [cotton embroi¬
dered robe], 1 was very young, and even
though 1 felt bashful at the time, I was very

against the Ainu, he first had to change himself:

attracted to the designs. ... 1 appreciate

It came to me [in 1948] that the Ainu

what she taught me because now it's in my

shouldn't have to suffer from poor self-

blood (S. Ogawa 1986: 13).

consciousness to the point that many Ainu
had to hide their identity. 1 couldn't con¬
front the racial prejudice against the Ainu
until I could get rid of my own inferiority

For a boy to learn what was considered
girl's work was a radical departure, but Bikky's
experience with garment-making added a

hunter and the hunted expressed itself

complex. Rather than hiding behind my

huge inventory of complex designs to his

in this epic confrontation between man

Ainu-ness, I thought I should grapple

subconscious repertoire, which later ap-

and bear. (KM)

squarely with it. It was then that I made up
my mind to use my childhood nickname,
"Bikky," instead of my real [Japanese]
name, Hisao (Yamakawa 1988: 180-82).

47.17 Totem Pole, 1979
Bikky Sunazawa
Bikky's first full-scale totem pole was

"Bikky," which means "frog" in Ainu, also
became his artistic signature. While there is
at least one sculpture in which the name is

carved in 1979 for the Ainu Memorial

spelled in Japanese characters, in all other

Museum in his home village of

works he asserted his cultural independence

Chikabumi, Asahikawa. The pole, which
stands outside the museum, consists

from Japanese convention by adopting the
romanized spelling "Bikky."

of several Ainu elements, most
dominant of which is the itokpa (family

In keeping with his rebellious nature (and

crest emblem) of the killer whale. Also

in contrast to Fujito and most other Ainu carvers

included in the carvings are a prayer

whose livelihood depended on the bear-carving

stick (ikupasuy), offertory cup and

trade), Bikky rejected the Ainu bear-carving

saucer (tuki), images of the chief Ainu
deities (killer whale, bear, owl), and the
canoe, important to the survival of the

tradition, which he saw not as the focus of Ainu
identity but as part of a mental enclosure that

Ainu. (Ainu Memorial Museum of

imprisoned the Ainu people as surely as the

Kaneto Kawamura in Asahikawa)

stone walls of a penitentiary. Bikky's father had
sent him as a teenager to a master bear carver to
learn proper carving techniques, but after only a
month he was asked to leave because he refused
to carve the bear in the usual way,- for example,
he would carve horns on his bears.
47.17

3 42

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

and every day seemed to offer inspiring new
experiences. Although Bikky studied the
paintings exhibited in galleries and museums,
he never undertook formal art education
because he felt it restricted self-expression.
He read about art and artists, however, and
reported (author's interview with Junko
Takagi, 3 May 1995) that during this period
his work was influenced by abstract sculptors
including Ossip Zadkine (1 890-1967) and
Shigeru Ueki (1913-84). Like them, Bikky
explored the many possibilities of biomorphic forms, shapes that were featured in
his first abstract series, "Animals," which led
to his acceptance into the Modern Art
Association of japan in 1962.
Bikky divorced and moved to Sapporo,
which in the 1970s was the locus for social
activism and racial consciousness for Ainu
and enlightened Japanese. Bikky soon
became embroiled in the fight for Ainu
rights, as his parents had been forty years
earlier. He made use of his artistic talents and
was at the forefront of the Ainu movement.
Some Ainu remember Bikky more for his
work as an Ainu activist than for his art
(Siddle, this volume).

Early Major Works
In 1975 Bikky began a new series of carvings,
Ki-men (Wooden Masks). He carved variants of
masks whose form incorporated homonyms
of the "ki" sound in kanji, the written Chinese
language. First, he picked one of the "ki"
characters, and developed an image through
sketches that drew on the character's shape
47.18 Kami no shita (Tongue of

peared, transformed, in his work. Bikky

or its meaning, then he carved these images

God), 1980

pushed his designs first into a signature style

into masklike sculptures, creating as many as

Bikky Sunazawa

for his jewelry, a precursor of his hallmark

150 masks. Some resemble pictorial symbols,

In this massive work Bikky sought to

design, the so-called Bikky mon'yo (Bikky pat¬

others odd creatures,- some are simple

express the presence and power of gods

terns). Later they were integrated into some

abstract forms, while others are quite sensual

of his larger bird and totem-pole sculptures.

(figs. 47.15a, b).

in the lives of Ainu people. Its inspiration
may have come from the parunpe, a
triangular mark cut into the end of the

While he didn't know it at that time, he had

During these years Bikky found it

ikupasuy, which conveyed a man's

revolutionized Ainu tourist art, giving it new

difficult to make a living from his abstract

prayers to the gods. The precision of

vitality. Today "Bikky patterns" are found on

sculpture. People could not easily understand

Bikky’s chisel cuts across the face of

many items wherever Ainu tourist art is sold.

his art, and his involvement in Ainu activism

Art and Politics

with a large craft company, Kitanihon

this large-scale piece gives its surface

hurt sales. Eventually he was forced to work

an undulating sheen that invites
touching, something the artist encour¬
aged but which unfortunately violates

In 1953 his private and artistic life took a

Mingei-sha. Although he produced much

contemporary museum rules prohibiting

dramatic turn: he got married and left

more tourist art than fine art during his

the touching of artwork. (MCAS)

Hokkaido to live in Tokyo for a decade,

tenure at the craft company, he also

although he returned to the Akan tourist

stretched the boundaries of the traditional

resorts during summer seasons to make the

bear-and-hunter format, which he had

money he needed to stay in Tokyo. In Tokyo

previously shunned, creating an exquisite

Bikky was exposed to the intoxicating world

ensemble called Bear and Hunter (Ekasbi)

of avant-garde art and intellectual thought,

(fig. 47.16). Carved from a stump of a tree,

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

343

this work was his single attempt to represent
the struggle of the Ainu against both natural
and human forces. Like Matsui, Bikky had
accompanied his father, Koa-kanno, who was
renowned as a bear hunter, on many hunting
trips, where he observed the competition
between nature and humans. In Ekasbi his
observations of the hunt, his feelings about his
father, the plight of nature, and human
struggles can all be perceived.
In 1978, facing a professional crisis and a
second divorce and remarriage, Bikky quit the
craft company and moved from Sapporo to
Otoineppu, a small village only fifty-five miles
(ninety kilometers) from the northern tip of
Hokkaido where the harsh winter season lasts
for six months of the year. Here Bikky found
his ideal working environment, with few
distractions, plenty of wood, and natural
surroundings as inspiration. Bikky began
working on a commission for a totem pole to
be erected at the Ainu Memorial Museum in
Chikabumi, Asahikawa, where he had been
born and raised. (Although totem poles were
not part of the traditional Ainu repertoire,
small-scale totem poles had been erected at
tourist areas since the end of World War II.)
Bikky's first full-scale totem pole was a
composite of Ainu ceremonial symbols
featuring a killer whale itokpa (family crest), an
ikupasuy (prayer stick), and tuki (lacquered sake
bowl), as well as images of the most important
kamuy-—bear and killer whale (gods of the
47.19

mountains and sea) and an owl (the protective

47.19 Juka (Wooden Flower), 1989

spirit of the village). The pole (fig. 47.17) was

Bikky Sunazawa

erected in April 1979.

The form of the works in this series was

In 1980 Bikky created another piece of

inspired by inaw, the tufted-wood sticks

massive sculpture with an Ainu theme. Kami no

that traditionally mark places of Ainu

shita {Tone)ue of God; fig. 47.18) is most impres¬

ritual. It was Bikky’s intention that
viewers participate in the creation of

sive: the six-foot-high (two-meter) tongue

these wooden flowers by arranging the

symbolizes communication with the spirit

sculpted willow branches as they chose.

world and the immense power of the gods.

(HOVO)

The contrast between its cracked and stained
body, suggesting a weathered old denizen of

47.20

the forest, and the glinting, machinelike

Totem Poles at Kispiox

When Bikky—whose name means "frog"

precision of its chiseled surface is astonishing,

in Ainu—visited an Indian site at Kispiox,

and invites touching. Bikky drew inspiration

British Columbia, in 1983, he was

from the v- or triangular-shaped parunpe

impressed upon seeing how frogs and
other motifs were skillfully interwoven on

(tongue), traditionally carved at the end of the

the totem pole. His comment: “Obviously

ikupasuy (see fig. 46.11), whose function is to

how to incorporate frogs into the design

deliver a message or prayer to the gods. Bikky

elements appears to be something

probably intended his sculpture to function in

extraordinary, but it’s also just simply

a similar fashion.

great sculpture. Frogs suddenly appear,

Another Ainu theme emerged in the Juka

coming out of fingernails or from eyes

(Wooden Flower) series Bikky began in 1982.

and mouths . . .just incredible!”
(Yamakawa 1988: 197).

These works (fig. 47.19) consist of a founda-

47.20

344

LIVING ARTS/C.

D U B REU I 1

47.21 Images of British Columbia,

tion "stalk" to which scores of "branches" or

1983

"petals," made of slender willow shoots whose

Bikky Sunazawa
This sculpture seems to have been
inspired by the conceptual images
Bikky admired in Northwest Coast art.

bark has been carefully peeled, could be at¬
tached. Bikky intended this to he a participa¬
tory series in which viewers would build a

Here a Coast Salish Skhwaikhwey

flower from a pile of peeled shoots stacked

mask form, with its peg eyes, deep

nearby, like a bird building a nest.

eye sockets, and prominent nose, is
reinterpreted: Bikky’s work has similar
peg eyes and deep eye sockets, but
he placed his mask on an N-shaped
body, evoking a power figure or fetish.
(Shinobu Ishijima Collection)

Although the wooden flowers resemble a
fireworks "starburst," there is little doubt that
Bikky's inspiration was based in part on inaw,
the shaved sticks that accompanied Ainu
rituals and were believed to turn into birds
that helped deliver messages or prayers to the
gods. Like this religious icon, so beautiful and
flowerlike in its simplicity, Bikky's series was
produced in a variety of shapes and sizes.
Bikky hoped that this participatory art would
encourage the viewer to experience art
physically and spiritually: to touch, to play, to
enjoy. In other installations the viewer
entered a darkened gallery and was guided by
a rope to a piece of sculpture, which could
only be experienced by touch.

47.22 Gozen sanji no gangu

(Toys at 3:00 A.M.), 1987

Northwest Coast Connections

Bikky Sunazawa

In 1983 an unexpected meeting with Douglas

Mysterious insectlike creatures

Sanders, a Canadian professor of indigenous

were often described in Bikky’s 1976

law, led Bikky into contact with the famous

book of prose and poetry, Aoi sakyu

Haida artist Bill Reid, who invited him to visit

nite (In the blue sand dune), which

British Columbia. Like many Ainu artists,

was based on his dreams from 1964
to 1973. He created a series of

47.21

Bikky had been inspired by Northwest Coast

sculptures from these themes, like

art and readily accepted an opportunity to see

this dragonfly-like creature. (HOVO)

totem poles in their natural setting at old
Gitksan village on the

caused by my hasty ignorance without
grasping the content of the gigantic

Llpper Skeena River and on
the Queen Charlotte Islands
(Higuchi 1987: 195).
Cracked and split, rotting
and returning to nature,
these ancient, weathered
poles were powerful
witnesses of native history
(fig. 47.20).
. . . these creations were
terrifically magical, demon¬
strating the serious observa¬
tion and struggle of native

monumentality of the totem poles
(Bankaha Shinpo, 18 November 1983).
Bikky was struck by the symbolism of
mythical creatures revealed in the last breath
of their power, returning to nature, and he
became aware that this aspect of the cycle of
life had been missing in his art. He became
deeply embarrassed that he had called his
previous columnar art "totem poles." Now that
he knew them firsthand, physically and
emotionally, he never again used the word
"totem" to describe his work. He quickly

artists towards nature. . . .

abandoned his intention to carve a totem

When I confronted them, my

pole, which he had announced in a local

previous knowledge about

newspaper before departing for his trip, but

totem poles just blew away. 1

working in Reid's studio on Granville Island in

had seen them before as a

Vancouver he did produce a number of

humorous curiosity, like
something you might do as a
hobby. But upon experi¬

paintings and sculptures, including Images of
British Columbia, which reflects his impressions

encing them in person I

of the art of Canada's First Nations, such as

became overwhelmed and

this abstract version of a Coast Salish

felt nauseous. This was

Skhwaikhwey mask (fig. 47.21).

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

345

47.23 Praying to the Gods

realized that being Ainu could be a positive

This photo shows Bikky conducting a

force in his career.

kamuynomi, or special prayer to a tree
spirit, using an ikupasuy (prayer stick)

Last works

and ceremonial sake on January 18,
1986 in front of his studio in

Returning to Otoineppu changed by his

Otoineppu, Hokkaido. He performed

Canadian experience, Bikky's art was also

this ritual in preparation for carving the

dramatically transformed, especially in terms

log before which he kneels. (Fukao and

of its relationship to nature. He began to

Kitayama, 1986)

focus on the theme of wind with a monu¬
mental outdoor sculpture called Yottsu no kaze
(Four Winds; fig. 47.25), emphasizing that
both the material and the context of this
47.24 Kaze ni kiku (Listening to the

Wind), 1986
Bikky Sunazawa
Bikky created these sculptures shortly
before his death in 1989. The work is

Bikky was also impressed by the status
contemporary native artists enjoyed in British

You are a four-headed and four-legged
monster.
As you are so furious, people love your
intermediate moments,
which are called the four seasons.
I pray, blow the strongest wind upon me
and my entire body.

I make use of the trees in nature, grown

Columbia. Their works were sought after,

without touching human hands, as materi¬

widely published, and exhibited in public and

als. Thus, they are living things. It's quite

private galleries and museums (Yamakawa

natural that living things will atrophy and

1988: 208-209). "On meeting Bill Reid, my

decay I will reconstruct them anew . . . I'm

accompanied by this poem:
Wind,

finished piece were provided by nature:

stereotype image of Indians was shattered. Here
was a native person who was successful and

trying my luck with wooden sculptures.
Outdoor sculptures are always done in
bronze and stone, but I'm going to submit

respected, someone with pride" (Banknba Shinpo,

wooden sculptures. The intention of the

18 November 1983). By contrast, most Japanese

creation is to establish my work in an

considered Ainu artists as second-rate artists—

outdoor environment, and the natural

souvenir-makers with little artistic skill.

phenomena of snow and wind will add to

His trip also helped him confront

their completeness. ... I calculate that it

Wind,

something else: "I had another fact to confirm

will stand there at least fifty years (Hariu

While you are a four-headed and four¬

in Canada other than my creation of art"

Especially, blow it upon my eyes.

legged monster,

(Hariu et al. 1989: 103). Although he never

I'd like to present you with a nice pair of
four-legged pants.
And please, hold me once.
(MCAS)

346

et al

1989: 100-101).

He was commissioned to produce a

elaborated, I believe he was referring to his

large sculpture for the opening of the

struggle with ethnicity. His experience in

Museum of Contemporary Art in Sapporo,

Canada helped him break through his self-

and for this work four-hundred-year-old

consciousness at being called an Ainu artist in

Japanese red spruce trees were delivered to

the professional world of Japanese art. He

Bikky's studio. Before proceeding with a new

began accepting wider boundaries and

work, Bikky usually performed an Ainu prayer

LIVING ARTS/C.

D U BREU 1 L

arranged to be excluding one from the
conversation. The latter composition might
suggest a well-known Ainu myth about the
wind that was performed as a ritual by the
Yakumo Ainu. In this tale the evil east wind
blew so hard that salmon could not swim
upstream, but the other winds caught him
after a dramatic battle and made him
apologize to the people. Bikky would have
known this myth and may have intended it
as one permutation of his composition.

Early in 1987 Bikky started a new series
entitled Cozen sanji no gancju (Toys at 3.00 A.M.;
fig. 47.22). As the title suggests, the series
was created early in the morning, close to
daybreak. Bikky had lived in his own time
frame since his youth, and his personal
biological clock operated differently from
other people's.
1 try to devote from 1 1 P.M. to around

3:34 A.M. to shaping my ideas. I always
stop at 3:34 A.M. because that is the time
when the express train, Rishiri, passed by,
and then I begin carving. The sound of
the train became a signal for me to begin
carving. 1 have worked by this routine for
eight years (Hariu et al

1989:105).

Although he was very gregarious and
loved socializing, he needed complete
privacy for his artistic activity, when he was
"confronting himself," as he described it.
Carving at night in the northern Fdokkaido
winter was a considerable challenge, because
the temperature in his studio, with only one
small heater, was often well below zero. Fde
frequently would lose sensitivity in his
hands, and fragments of ice would fly when
47.25 Yottsu no kaxe (Four Winds),
1988
In this simple but powerful large-scale
work, the natural overall shape of the
Japanese red spruce logs is retained
but a concave portion of each piece,
facing a different direction, is carved
out. The rough-hewn interiors contrast
with the exterior surfaces, which are
marked with thousands of chisel
marks, creating a new grain for the
tree. (MCAS)

ceremony, kamuynomi, but this time his
prayer for the god of the trees was filmed by
Hokkaido Shimbun (fig. 47.23,- Fukao and
Kitayama 1986), consistent with his decision
to accept—and to promote—his Ainu
ethnicity in a more open manner.
Kaze ni kikit (Listening to the Wind) is a
twenty-foot (six-meter) abstract canoe¬
shaped piece designed for horizontal floor
display accompanied by four cylindrical
forms to be arranged by the presenter
(fig. 47.24). At the top of each cylindrical
form is a rectangular projection, which is
probably intended as a head and gives the
impression of an abstract human figure
standing, bending, or stooping. The
cylindrical forms create a different impres¬
sion every time they are rearranged. For
example, they can seem like they're talking
to each other in a group, or they can be
47/MODERN art and artists

he struck green wood with his chisel or adze.
The ideas for such important works as Four

Winds took shape on these cold winter
nights. Just as his father had gained fortitude
from spending long cold nights in snow
caves while hunting, Bikky used self-imposed
adversity to bring out his creativity.
The Toys at 3.00 A.M. series was done in
small scale so that people could play with them
with their hands. While most of Bikky's largescale works have rough or small rhythmical
chisel marks on the surface, Toys at 3.00 AM.
were finished with polished, smooth surfaces
that illustrate the mysterious shininess that
almost all new life exhibits.
Toys at 3:00 A.M. expressed the primordial
spirit-world creatures that shared the nights
with Bikky. All these insectlike creatures have
articulated segments such as long, slender,
flexible feelers, tails, and antennae, which are

34 7

47.28

connected with hinged wooden joints so that

hut perhaps he had begun to feel a force

they can move freely. This type of detailed and

affecting his fate, the spell of the evil trickster.

delicate artistry is technically related to the
variety of sea world creatures and fish he
created when he was working at the Kitanihon

painful malignancy, full knowledge of which

Mingeisha (Kitanihon Folkcraft Company) in

was withheld from him, he maintained his

Sapporo in the 1960s and 1970s (fig. 47.26).
47.27 Nitne-kamuy (Evil God), 1988
Bikky Sunazawa

In the fall of 1988 Bikky was diagnosed
with a deadly form of cancer. In spite of his

pace of work and even participated in the

Bikky's last work, titled Nitne-kamuy (Evil

opening of "The Contemporary Artists' Series

God; fig. 47.27), was begun early in 1988 but

'89'' at the Kanagawa Prefectural Gallery near

was interrupted by other work during the

Tokyo. Bikky flew in from Hokkaido and

god who people in the Asahikawa region

summer (Echizen 1992: 4). The sculpture

arrived at the gallery on a hospital gurney

where Bikky was born believed capable

consists of three spherical forms piled one on

with intravenous paraphernalia attached to

of inflicting great harm and calamity.

top of the other, with the uppermost form

his arm. The gallery had asked him to write

resembling a budding flower. Nitne-kamuy is

something for the exhibition catalogue, and

Nitne-kamuy was a legendary evil Ainu

Some regional place-names are derived
from incidents ascribed to this god.

the name of the evil god who played tricks on

he wrote a single word with ink and brush—

in this piece, which was completed

the Ainu people. No one seems to know why

kiki, which he had coined, meaning "spirit of

shortly before his death. (HAMA)

Bikky put an evil god's name on his last work,

wood"—and gave it to them. This word was

Bikky may have confronted his mortality

47.26 Kani (Crab), 1987
Bikky Sunazawa
Bikky also created sculptures of other
creatures, including insects, reptiles,
and fish whose articulated wings, tails,
heads, and limbs were fastened with
wooden pegs and whose surfaces are
covered with intricately carved Ainu
designs in relief. (KM)

348

47.28 Untitled, ea. 1980s

47.29 Ryo (Force or Spirit), 1989

Peramonkoro Sunazawa

Noriko Kawamura

Bikky’s mother, Peramonkoro Sunazawa,

A leading contemporary Ainu textile

born in 1897 in Chikabumi, Asahikawa,

artist, Kawamura is known for making

devoted herself to learning and

very large works. The spiral design in the

not only appropriate for the subject of the
exhibition, it also expressed his consonance
with Ainu religious beliefs, acknowledging
the spirits who endowed his works in the
same way that his ancestors had for genera¬

teaching Japanese-style dressmaking

center of this piece, similar to the paired

to Ainu women in the community, but

eyelike shapes sometimes found on the

she was also a respected master of

back of Ainu robes, is called kamuychik

1989, at the age of fifty-seven, just four days

traditional Ainu embroidery. Recognized

(god’s eye). Such designs were

after his last exhibition.

as one of the most talented textile

traditionally believed to ward off evil and

artists of the twentieth century, she

protect the wearer from evil spirits.

made important contributions to Ainu

Noriko's contem-porary design evokes

textile design. (Collection of Kazuo

that kind of protective power. (N.

Sunazawa)

Kawamura Collection)

tions. Soon after, he died, on January 25,

Bikky Sunazawas greatest contribution
to modern art was his ability to create a
vision of nature that transcends the mere
natural forms found on earth. More than
simply manipulating wood and form, his
belief in the spirit of the tree allowed him
not only to listen to the trees, but to give them
another life. He constantly tried to see the
supernatural order of things beyond nature,
reaching for kamuy that coexist with earth's
nature with dignity. In so doing, he went
beyond the concept of naturalism and reached
deeply into the Ainu soul. He once stated,
"I don't consciously try for an Ainu theme, but
I have an expression, descent, and foundation
that is different from the Yamato [Japanese]
race. I think it has to come out in my work"
(Y. Abe, Asabi Sbimbun, 26 January 1989).
During the exhibition on which he
worked so hard immediately before his
death, several of his sculptures sprouted wild
mushrooms. Bikky would have been pleased
to know that nature was finishing his work.
Bikky's legacy has been immortalized by
more than mushrooms. On November 29,
1987, two Japanese amateur astronomers,
K. Endate and K. Watanabe, members of the
International Astronomical Union, discovered a
small unknown planet. After a rigorous inde¬
pendent review, they registered the planet with
the Minor Planet Center at the Smithsonian
Astrophysical Observatory on September 1,
1993, and received registry number 5372. They
also named the planet. Eschewing the custom
of using only the family name, they gave the
planet the honor of carrying only a nickname:
that of the gifted contemporary Ainu artist,
Bikky (Marsden 1993: 22509).

Noriko Kawamura
Noriko Kawamura, a textile artist, was born
in 1947 as the third of eight daughters of
Kaneto (1893-1977) and Tome Kawamura
(born 1915). Kaneto was the hereditary chief
of the Chikabumi Ainu and a grandson of the
famous Ainu chief Monokute, whose
ancestors were said to have moved to
47.29

Chikabumi from the lower Ishikari River.

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

349

47.32

47.30 Hokkaido no shiki: Aki
mon 'yo (Four Seasons in Hokkaido:
Autumn Patterns), 1990

47.30

Norikos family was active in the flourish¬
ing tourist industry, which in those days
promoted the image of a primitive Hokkaido,

Noriko Kawamura

even suggesting that the Ainu still lived as
hunter-gatherers. Some Ainu criticized the
47.31 Hokkaido no shiki (fuyu):
Fukuro no sumu mori (Four Seasons

family for "selling" Ainu culture, but Kaneto

designs were traditionally done to prevent
evil spirits from attacking the [wearer's]
body, its nature is to be powerful (Hokkaido
Shimbun, 6 January 1994).
After she learned traditional robe design
from her mother and other elder women,

countered with statements that these same

Noriko confronted the proverbial "artistic

Where Owls Live), 1991

Ainu were ashamed of their race. Although the

wall," feeling powerless to change what she

Noriko Kawamura

Ainu at that time were being forced to

felt were nearly perfect traditional designs. As

assimilate into Japanese society, Kaneto moved

she struggled to discover her own style, she

in the opposite direction, reaffirming his Ainu

happened to see a different type of textile art

in Hokkaido. Winter: The Forest

These two (of four) pieces from the
series Hokkaido no shiki evoke vividly
the dramatic seasonal changes in

identity. Because her grandfather and father

done by Peramonkoro Sunazawa (1897-1971),

and raised. She stated in an interview

built the local Ainu museum and were involved

who was Bikky Sunazawa's mother and is one

that "because Hokkaido's winter is very

in Ainu tourism, Noriko had opportunities to

of the most respected textile artists of the

cold, I want to create textile art for the

travel frequently in Hokkaido and throughout

interior of the home. I want the textile to

Japan, demonstrating traditional Ainu culture

Hokkaido, where the artist was born

evoke warm feelings” (Hokkaido

Shimbun, 6 January 1994). (SOTD)

Noriko Kawamura

and dance. The iyomante (bear-sending)
ceremony was often performed in her child¬

Mon'yo (design patterns) in 1989, whose

She understood the grave situation the Ainu
faced at that time and accepted her role in the
tourism business out of pride for the great

In Mokurei (Wooden Spirit), done in

contribution to the Ainu community that had

1991, gray tones establish a rhythmic

been fostered by her father.

vertical structure; overlaid with Ainu
elements with contrasting color

At a time when scholars and historians
were forecasting the demise of the Ainu,

accents, the design produced is
reminiscent of Henri Matisse's late-

Noriko was actively strengthening Ainu culture

phase cutout works (e.g., Jazz).

by shifting from dance performance to reviving

(N. Kawamura Collection)

traditional Ainu robe design in the 1980s.
Ainu designs have a deep sense of power.
When 1 am working on a garment I

curvilinear designs are somewhat similar to
the flowing curvilinear "formline" design
system that underlies most Northwest Coast
Indian art styles. This new style allowed her
to express her ideas in ways that traditional
gowns could not and brought Ainu textile art
to new level of artistic achievement.
In that same year, Noriko created a piece
entitled Ryo, meaning in Japanese "power,"
"force," or "spirit," in which the contrast of colors
and movement in the design does indeed create
tremendous power (fig. 47.29). The graphic
strength of the Ainu spiral dominates the center

sometimes become very tired, and it's very

of the work, surrounded by streams of vividly

difficult to continue, but I feel strong

colored diagonal cloudlike formations.

pressure from the design. Because Ainu

350

Peramonkoro's work, Noriko synthesized
some of these forms into a new style called

hood, both for spiritual and tourist reasons.
47.32 Mokurei (Wooden Spirit),
1991

twentieth century (fig. 47.28). Inspired by

LIVING ARTS/C.

DUBREUIL

A large-scale four-part textile work entitled

47.31

47.33 A Daughter's Happiness,

Hokkaido no shiki (Four Seasons in Hokkaido), produced

more serious about her work. Because she had

1991

in 1990 and 1991, displays the colorful foliage of

no formal artistic training, her progress was slow,

Chinita Sunazawa

autumn in Akimon'yo (Autumn Pattern, fig. 47.30)

but eventually she became committed to

seen as dark waves of color accented by abstract

pursuing a career in commercial art

Bikky Sunazawa was Chinita’s father,
and as a child she immersed herself

Ainu designs. The winter piece, Fukuro no sumu mori

Fder first professional break came in 1991

(The Forest Where Otols Live, fig. 47.31), features the

when she was asked to do the illustrations for a

discrimination faced by Ainu people.

owl, Shamafukuro (Bubo blakistoni), revered by the

Japanese translation of Ainskii Fol'klor by Nikolai

While Chinita respects her father's

Ainu as kotan-kor-kamuy (god of the village). The

A. Neviskii (1892-1937), a Russian linguist

artistic achievements and is proud

sequential presentation of design elements in the

who lived in Japan from 1915 until 1929 and

work recalls the unfolding of a stoiy in an Ainu

compiled a great collection of Ainu folklore.

yukar (oral epic tale).

Fdis work, published posthumously in Russia in

in his art books. Gradually she found
in drawing a way to escape the

to carry on his tradition, today she
makes her own contributions to Ainu
art. (Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku
Center)

Noriko's textiles, like Bikky's sculptures,
show how modern Ainu artists have created
new artistic genres within an Ainu cultural

1972, remained unknown in Japan until 1991,
when it was translated by Kazuyukt Uoi.
Chinita illustrated these tales with

framework. Mokurei (Wooden Spirit, fig.

imaginative images of Ainu people and with

47.32).She has stated (author's interview on 2

Ainu geometrical designs. Although the

February 1998) that when she begins a new

influence of "Bikky designs" (Bikky mon'yo) is

work she feels the presence of a guardian

most evident in the latter, her images of Ainu

spirit, sermak, protecting her back from evil

woman are more striking. For example, A

spirits. Fder belief in the power of kamuy is

Daughter's Happiness tells the story of an Ainu

perhaps best expressed in her work.

girl who grows into a beautiful woman under
the protection of the bear kamuy. In this work

Chinita Sunazawa

(fig. 47.33) an Ainu woman, drawn in a flat

Chinita Sunazawa was born in Chikabumi,

style reminiscent of the schematic ledger art

Asahikawa, in I960,- she is the daughter of the

of the Plains Indians of North America, is seen

late Ainu sculptor Bikky Sunazawa. Chinita,

in an exuberant moment dancing to Ainu

whose name means "dream" in Ainu, grew up

music with her hair flying. Another story, "Sad

watching her father create art in many media—

Fox," tells of a fox who tried to transform

not just the wooden sculpture for which he is

himself into a god (fig. 47.37) but was caught

primarily famous but also thousands of paintings

in the act by Okikurumi, a yukar hero, who

and sketches—and began drawing at a young

punished him severely. Chinita shows the fox

age. Like her father, her talent for drawing began

trapped in a cocoonlike state, head bowed in

as a hobby, but as the years passed she became

shame, enmeshed in Ainu designs.

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

351

While Ainu designs are the central
feature of Chinita's art, she mingles them with
design elements representing many other
ethnic styles (fig. 47.36):
When 1 draw and paint, 1 mix and combine
graphic designs from all over the world. . . .
Unity, balance, and harmony [are] the main
focus in my work. I'm especially conscious
of the concept of symmetry and asymme¬
try. When you first look at the design
elements of traditional Ainu robes, they
appear symmetrical, but when you observe
them carefully, the many divergences
merge into a single unified design (inter¬
view with the author, Febaiary 1998).
This concept of unity reflects her cultural
identity as well She often refers to herself as a
"hybrid" and considers being Ainu just one part
of her self, not the dominant source of her
creative inspiration. She describes her psycho¬
logical state when painting:
1 feel like I'm in a trance, like going on a
shamanic journey across design boundaries
of all ethnic people. I get into ecstasies,
become one with the painting, and am
surprised at the outcome (interview with
the author, February 1998).
Since 1991 Chinita has been working
with smaller works of graphic art, but she
occasionally has undertaken large-scale
paintings, like Yin (1998) and Yang (1997)
(figs. 47.34, 47.35), which incorporate the
two Chinese characters for "happiness" and
"longevity" in a dynamic composition—bold
pictographic elements dominate.
Yin and yang are dominant themes in
Chinita's art, as is her expression of the ideas
of Tao, a religion concerned with harmony
between humans and nature and the discov¬
47.34

ery of nature's essential rhythms. Chinita is
concerned with problems of world peace and
the future of children and humanity and
wants to address these issues in her work.
Like other young Ainu artists, she uses the
legacy of her culture to advance her vision of
a world in which ethnic traditions and

47.36 Untitled, 1992

diversity serve as positive forces to mold the

Chinita Sunazawa

future of mankind.
Chinita’s love for indigenous
design elements recalls that
of her father: like Bikky, she

Conclusion

believes that indigenous art

When the Ainu began to respond to external

has a special essence that

market opportunities, producing, for instance,

speaks to the core of those

towelracks with Ainu decoration for sale to

who create it. (C. Sunazawa

Japanese in FJokkaido in the early 1800s, secular

Collection)

commercial forces were introduced to tradi¬
tional Ainu art that would forever change it. As
the power of religious restrictions on the use of

352

LIVING ARTS/C. DUBREUIL

the many losses Ainu have suffered over the
past several hundred years at the hands of
external forces (primarily Japanese), Ainu
people, culture, and art have successfully
survived conquest and assimilation, in part
because the flame of artistic creativity
continued to provide a focus for Ainu
identity. For the Ainu, like many other
indigenous peoples, artistic creativity had no
special name or linguistic term. Art was in
their souls and bones and was celebrated
even in the worst of times.
Today Ainu fine art is still in its
infancy. The few artists profiled above are
only a small part of this new wave, but they
exemplify the new life that is being brought
to the Ainu tradition as younger artists
express their individual creativity. New art
and new artists will emerge and will express
Ainu-ness in different ways, certainly not
always within an identifiable Ainu tradition.
In today's shrinking world, jewelry deco¬
rated with "Bikky designs" can appear in
Fdokkaido Ainu tourist shops supplied by
craftsmen from other Asian countries just as
easily as Ainu textile patterns may someday
appear in Paris or New York fashion houses.
Such challenges demand the attention
and skill of native artists who have a major
responsibility today as spokespersons and
interpreters of cultural traditions. Art has
functioned as a powerful enunciator of Ainu
tradition in the past. While artistic challenges
remain, it is my hope that the 1997 Ainu Shinpo
(a law for preservation and promotion of Ainu art
and culture) will help young artists receive the
training needed to excel and compete in today's
competitive art market. Anonymity is no longer
acceptable. For the Ainu, it seems that the

47.35

47.34 Yin, 1998

animal and human images weakened, new

moment of extinction has passed, and the artistic

Chinita Sunazawa

opportunities emerged for Ainu artists, and by

flame, rekindled, grows.

47.35 Yang, 1997

the beginning of the twentieth century an

Chinita Sunazawa

explosive new phase of development stimulated

In these works, Chinita expresses the

by Ainu poverty, market demands, tourism, and

Tao—a path, way, system of order—
one of the most important concepts
in Chinese language: "Tao is the

government intervention was initiated. In the
latter part of the twentieth century, traditional

center of all philosophical and

Ainu art continues to be a defining element of

spiritual discourse.” (Sankyo Co. Ltd.)

Ainu social identity, as it has been for centuries,

47.37 Sad Fox, 1991

and tourist art continues to play an important

Chinita Sunazawa

economic role in Ainu life. Art created from

Ainu considered the fox to be a

both of these impulses will likely remain an

shaman’s spirit helper. In her

important factor in the living Ainu tradition. At

illustrations for a collection of Ainu
folktales, Chinita stylized the fox’s
tail into a spiral reminiscent of the

the same time, the emergence of Ainu fine arts
as a new genre has made it possible for Ainu

traditional Ainu morew. (Hokkaido

artists to add their unique voices to the ranks of

Shuppan Kikaku Center)

modern artists throughout the world. Despite

47/MODERN ART AND ARTISTS

Qnnirn

353

J
48/Shishirimuka:
A s mu i River Tale
Koichi Kaizawa

APAN IS MADE UP OF MANY ISLANDS, ONE

ture outside dipped down to minus twenty or

of the largest being the northernmost

thirty degrees Fahrenheit. A straw mat hung

island of Ainu mosir, also known as

in place of a curtain in the entryway; even

Hokkaido. In the southern part of the

when the fifty-gallon (two hundred-liter)

island on the Pacific side is the Hidaka

barrel that had been cut in half and made

region. The Shishirimuka River is the longest

into a stove became so hot it glowed red,

of the rivers running through Hidaka. Like my

one's back remained cold. Despite this

ancestors, ! was born and raised in the hills

lifestyle, my grandfather—who always

about thirteen miles (twenty-one kilometers)

favored me—often invited me to stay with

upriver from the ocean. When 1 was a child,

them. I cannot really recall whether or not I

the ground would freeze solid and the snow

went happily each time, but the stew my

would pile up during the winter months,-

grandmother Hekasunure (later she was

unable to work their farms, many laborers left

given the Japanese name Fume) made was

to toil in the mountains from November to

always delicious. I have yet to taste anything

March. That was still in the days when they

that comes close to it these days. It was chock-

cut trees with a saw and hauled them out to

full of all sorts of ingredients seasoned prima¬

the nearest road with horses, the days when

rily with salt. 1 think she used wild plants that

work was done by humans and horses. The

had been picked at their peak in springtime.

Kakizaki's work, Portraits of Ezo Chief¬

ground being frozen and blanketed with snow,

Plants like a small, flowering herb called

tains. (Y. and M. Kitao Collection)

there was no damage to the hillsides, so it was

pukusakina and wild garlic root (pukusa) were

< Inikari, Chieftain of Barasanmo
1843 copy by Teiki Kojima after Hakyo

often dried and left hanging from the ceiling.
It was these kinds of things and dace fish
(supun) that went into my grandmother's stew.
When December came around, it was
time to move the logs across the 165-foot(fifty-meter) wide river. Where the river ice
was still thin, branches were scattered across
it and covered with snow,- after they were
stomped down, water was thrown on them,
and in just one night a sturdy ice bridge was

fl!®
MHBa
- 1 ' * M-T

n. ■

-

A

N

l

^ScIIsSl-er d tisss?, ■

' j111|||| i

1!

formed. This would begin to soften toward
the end of February, and after that the river
could only be crossed at nightfall when the
temperature dropped. There were many
times when a cry of "A horse has fallen!" or
"The sleigh has been swept away!" came out
of the blackness, and everyone would rush to
the river. Thankfully, my grandfather's party
never did suffer a loss, either human or horse.
The river no longer freezes over like it did
thirty years ago, though, due to the construc¬

48.1 Tadashi Kaizawa

also a gentle season for the young trees and

tion of a hydroelectric dam at a place upriver

Koichi Kaizawa's father, the late

undergrowth. Trails were made by spreading

called Iwashi. The power plant causes the

Tadashi Kaizawa, was one of the Ainu

branches from the felled trees and covering

water level to rise in the evening and fall

them with snow to protect what lay below

again in the morning, so nothing more than

from any damage.

spongelike ice ever forms on the river, and its

leaders who fought to preserve the
Saru River and the lands surrounding
Nibutani village. The majority of this
land was given to the Ainu as "allow¬

At that time, my grandfather Yojiro

uneven surface makes it dangerous to cross.
Before the dam was built, the river was

ance land” by the Japanese govern¬

worked as a tree cutter about two and a half

ment in the Meiji period. As the elder

miles (four kilometers) upriver, across the

crystal clear. We could easily see the river

Kaizawa neared his death he told his

Shishirimuka from a village called Penakori.

bottom more than seven feet (two meters)

Neither a bridge nor roads led to the moun¬

below, and the clean water also prevented the

tains where my grandfather cut trees. Oil

rocks from getting slippery. During the

never once tried to listen.” He was pho¬

lamps provided the only light in the rented

summer, we children often went to the river

tographed standing in silent protest in a

shed that served as their bunkhouse. To make

on our own to play,- with 85-degree days few

buckwheat field that is now underwater.

matters worse, moonlight would spill through

and far between—one can barely call it

the cracks of the straw walls as the tempera¬

"summer" in Hokkaido—we were nearly

son, "With this dam as my screen, I
can deliver the voices of the Ainu to a
country and a government that has

48/A SARU

RIVER TALE

355

48.2 Toroshino Kaizawa (1889-

1982) With Radishes

always swimming on cold days. We used to

electricity for 1,000 households,- it is also

gather up driftwood and light a fire so we

destroying some of the surrounding irrigation

could warm ourselves after swimming. Tired

systems by forcing dam water into them.

and hungry, we would sometimes sneak into a

With only 140 households, the village of

nearby field and swipe potatoes and corn to

Nibutani has a population of just less than

cook over the fire. We grilled fish, too, when¬

500, more than 70 percent of whom are of

ever we managed to catch some.

Ainu heritage. Nibutani has the densest

Although less than fifty years have passed
since my grandfather harvested lumber in these

population of Ainu in the world. It was here
that the government chose to build a dam.

As industrial enterprises expanded in the

mountains, nowadays the logging companies

In our village, we have a ceremony

late twentieth century, Ainu found it in¬

use bulldozers and power shovels to cut trees

known as the chip-sanke. With the govern¬

creasingly difficult to maintain a living by

year-round. They tear into the mountainsides

ment's policies to assimilate the Ainu into

and build roads so that their trucks can haul logs

Japanese culture threatening to extinguish

from the very tops of the mountains. After the

Ainu culture, Diet member and Ainu cultural

farming, fishing, and hunting. Fishing for
salmon had been banned; hunting was
tightly regulated; and agricultural lands,
mostly of low quality, were being lost to

trees have been hauled away, the smallest

leader Shigeru Kayano endeavored to, at the

industrial development and economic

amount of rain washes the soil from the aban¬

very least, preserve this custom in the form of

transformation. In photographs like this

doned roads, carrying it down into the river. In

a festival. In the Ainu language, chip means

no time at all this runoff can cause flooding.

"boat," and scwke means "to bring down",- it was

Such reckless deforestation, combined with the

originally a ceremony to mark the first launch¬

tional economy still supported many Ainu

drainage of non-sewage waste water, has left the

ing of a new boat. Begun twenty-nine years ago,

families. (NAA-T-7)

Saru River (as the Japanese renamed the

the festival is held to ensure that the boats

one, taken in Nibutani in the fall of 1965,
Sister M. Inez Hilger recorded Ainu village
life of the Saru River region when the tradi¬

48.2

48.3 Nibutani Dam

48.3

Shishirimuka) thoroughly polluted.

now being housed in museums are floated

In 1996, ignoring the protests of Ainu

In 1996 the central government com¬

and other local residents, the govern¬

pleted the construction of another dam on

48.4). This festival is held not only for us, the

the same Saru River (fig. 48.3). This dam’s

Ainu, but for all people.

ment constructed a dam on the Saru
River in the district of Nibutani, which

upon the river at least once each year (fig.

original purpose was to supply water to a

In August 1996, four months after the

kaido. Although the dam's efficiency

planned industrial sector some thirty-eight

dam halted the river's flow, the floodgates were

has been questioned and the Sapporo

miles (sixty kilometers) away in Tomakomai.

opened one last time for the sake of the festi¬

District Court has mandated compensa¬

The proposed industrial development was

val. With the water draining faster than usual,

eventually deemed a mistake, and as the plans

it took only four days for the river to return to

has the largest Ainu population in Hok¬

tion to the Ainu because their lands and
rights were violated by the construction,

for the industrial park underwent thorough

its normal flow. Although the water had been

example of continued Japanese vio¬

reconsideration, only the dam was built.

stagnant for only four months, the river bot¬

lence to Ainu lands and culture.

Despite having lost its primary purpose, the

tom was now covered with sludge, four inches

the existence of the dam is a modern

35 6

Nibutani dam was constructed and is now

(ten centimeters) thick in shallow water and as

producing 3,000 kilowatts, enough to provide

much as ten inches (thirty centimeters) thick in

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. KAIZAWA

the deeper areas. A foul smell emanated from

dam basin could be buried under silt. Given

the water and drifted throughout the village as

all this, one has to wonder why such an

the wind changed directions, and the river-

utterly useless dam was built in our village.

hanks were so choked with silt that it was

My father, Tadashi Kaizawa, before his

impossible to walk along them. The govern¬

death on February 3, 1992, joined with

ment hauled away the silt and spread gravel

Shigeru Kayano to oppose the construction

alongside the river. Somehow we managed to

of the Nibutani dam. When they began their

hold the chip-sanke, but the water level rose to

fight, my father said, "With this dam as my

its former height only three days after the

podium, I can deliver the voices of the Ainu

festival,- thus, it would seem that the

to a country and a government that has

government's stated alternate purpose for the

never once tried to listen." They first filed a

dam, flood control, is an unlikely possibility.

legal objection to the confiscation of their

Could the dam manage a flood, even if it

land by the Hokkaido Land Expropriation

reportedly only happens in this area once

Committee. A total of fifteen attorneys

every hundred years? In 1966 a levee sufficient

assisted them without promise of compensa¬

to handle the once-in-a-century flood was

tion, and more than 10,000 people showed

constructed from the mouth of the river all the

their support by signing a petition. My father

way to Nibutani, and there has yet to be any

and Kayano argued the following points as

risk of flooding.

they presented their case to the Land Expro¬

The places of my childhood are gone.

priation Committee, the Ministry of Con¬

An intersection for a national highway needed

struction, and the Sapporo District Court:
that the Ainu people are, historically, the
indigenous people of Japan,- by failing to
consider the needs and wishes of the Ainu
people, construction of the dam was illegal,and construction of the dam has robbed
those Ainu living in Nibutani of their culture.
Although my father had never con¬
sulted me about anything before, he came to
me and said, "This legal action, it could last
ten, maybe even twenty years. I don't know
if i'll be around to see it through. What do
you think? Will you finish the fight?'1 He was
healthy at the time and so, never imagining
that he would die so soon, I casually replied,
"Sure, I'll take it up when you're gone."
My father was given only two opportu¬
nities to present his opinion officially: once
before the Hokkaido Land Expropriation
Committee at its first hearing on February 15,
1988, and again on April 26 of the following
year during an on-site inspection. The com¬

48.4

Chip-sanke Ceremony

In the canoe-launching ceremony (chip-

sanke) Ainu pray for the protection of a

for the dam is at the spot where I used to stay

mittee handed down its decision—approval of

with my grandparents during the winter

the forced expropriation—one year later, on

logging. An embankment meant to stop the

February 3, 1989. The plaintiffs quickly filed a

flow of silt into the dam was built where they

request for an investigation with the Minister

Festival has been held every August 20

used to haul the timber over the ice bridge.

of Construction, provided for under the Land

since 1972 on the Saru River in

The dam was topped with an impressive

Expropriation Act, but it was another two years

permanent bridge that is off-limits to the

before they were able to present statements to

newly made canoe before launching it
in the river or the sea. The Chip-sanke

Nibutani; it has become both a major
tourist attraction and an important Ainu
communal gathering. The inaw on the
bow of this festival vessel is a vestige
of prayers offered for a safe passage.

general public. Some engineers have con¬

the Construction Ministry on a bitterly cold

cluded that the high silt content makes the

March day in 1991.

Saru River naturally unsuitable for a dam,- in

By that time, my father had undergone

this year alone, the embankment has filled up

surgery for cancer and had suffered a relapse,

with silt. With a water-level allowance of only

and the doctor had informed us that he had

thirty-three feet (ten meters), they say it is

only six months to live. We went to a room,

conceivable that in just ten years the Nibutani

one that is not normally open to the public,

48/A SARU

RIVER TALE

357

on the first floor of the Ministry of Construc¬

will become a human sacrifice at the bottom

tion. We were not served tea and the room

of that lake. If I did not do this, I would have

was without a heater. It must have been a
difficult time for my father. Nevertheless,

no explanation for my ancestors when I join
them. Someone must accept responsibility
for the destruction of Ainu mosir.

hiding his pain, he made his appeal:
My father finished his statement, but even
This concrete monstrosity has become a
symbol of the environmental degradation of
the peaceful land around Nibutani's Saai
River. How, indeed, would it look to the

before we left the building he turned to me
and said, "Koichi, take my place."
Exactly one year later, on February 3,

Ainu ekashi and jucbi [male and female elders]

1992, my father closed his eyes for the last

who, since ancient times, lived on this land

time at Oji Hospital in Tomakomai. On May

48.5 Old Man and Child

and thought always of the welfare of their

27, 1993, I went with Shigeru Kayano to the

During her visit to the Nibutani region

descendants? We, their descendants, have

in 1965 Sister M. Inez Hilger photo¬

been silent and obedient in the face of these

graphed a girl and her grandfather visit¬

evils of civilization. During this long history,

ing an abandoned homestead. Dams

we have lived through struggle and

and highways are not the only threat to

oppression, facing one thing after another.

mittee. When the court handed down its

Sapporo District Court, and together we filed
a lawsuit demanding a reversal of the decision
by the Hokkaido Land Expropriation Com¬

No one stops to listen to our voices because

verdict on March 27, 1997, Judge Ichimiya

favored the rural economy of Hokkaido.

those in power want only to see results, and

read from the decision:

It remains to be seen whether the Ainu

so the building goes on and on. I cannot

From an historical viewpoint, the Ainu are

can find ways to protect valued aspects

predict whether or not I will live until the

an indigenous people and lived here well

of their traditional life from the relent¬

dam is completed, but I have resolved to

before our country began its rule. Further¬

less modernization that has been im¬

build a little house on the land my ancestors

posed on them. (NAA-3-16)

more, keeping in mind the historical

left to me. When the water is dammed up, 1

sequence of events that precipitated the

traditional Ainu life; change has not

decline of the Ainu culture, in a situation
where the utmost consideration was called
for, there was instead unjust negligence and
utter disregard, and it is therefore illegal.
Despite the above ruling, the court approved
the dam's continued existence, and so from
the government's point of view, the matter is
nearly closed. It is now merely scurrying to
find justification for the completed dam.
The day will come when the folly of the
Nibutani dam will finally be acknowledged.
They will then open the floodgates, letting
the Shishirimuka River return to its original
state, and the dam will become a seventybillion yen bridge. It must be left standing,
though, as proof of the aggression against the
Ainu and to symbolize our "empty inherit¬
ance,” if only so that people will understand
that all humans are equal!

358

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. KAIZAWA

D

uring the preceding three

4C Ainu in the
International
Arena
Kelly L. Dietz

49.1

Oiichi Nomura, former Execu¬

tive Director of Utari Kyokai (Ainu
Association of Hokkaido), addressing

robbed of the means to practice their own

decades countless indigenous

culture, speak their own language, and

groups around the world have

determine their very existence. Like other

challenged the notion that they

indigenous peoples forgotten or ignored as

are assimilated and demanded the right to

distinct communities in the wake of

determine the future of their communities.

decolonization, the Ainu were subsumed

Although most indigenous peoples are now

under the rubric of "nation-building." Dispos¬

active to some extent domestically, unrespon¬

session, vigorous assimilation policies, and

siveness or ongoing oppression by govern¬

widespread discrimination have led to eco¬

ments has led significant numbers to seek

nomic and social second-class citizenship for

political redress on another front. Indigenous

the Ainu. According to a survey conducted

groups are taking their direct action beyond

by the Hokkaido Division of Public Welfare

what, to them, are arbitrarily imposed borders

in 1993, the number of Ainu receiving wel¬

in order to join

fare assistance is more than double that of

together in the

the majority Japanese population. Only 1 1.8

struggle for their

percent of Ainu youth advance to higher

rights. Increasingly

education, compared with 27.5 percent

aware of the global

among majority Japanese,- 34.6 percent of

indigenous commu¬

Ainu work in primary industries such as

nity and the possibili¬

fishing and logging, with Japanese filling

ties it holds for their

only 6.9 percent of such positions. Finally,

own movement,

the survey indicates that discrimination in

many Ainu are look¬

the workplace, in matters of marriage and

ing beyond Japan's

especially in schools, remains prevalent. That

borders and allying

such social hardships are shared by indig¬

themselves with other

enous peoples the world over reveals the

native peoples in

need to define the term "indigenous peoples"

indigenous actions at

so that it neither reflects the "purity" of one's
native blood nor is a designation arbitrarily

the international level.
The Ainu belong to a global community

developed or sought by indigenous peoples

that is at once remarkably diverse yet intrinsi¬

themselves. The world's nation-states will

cally connected Indigenous peoples live on

collectively be forced to address the specific

An excerpt from Nomura's speech at

every continent, in every hemisphere,- their

historical and contemporary realities of the

the opening ceremony for the Interna¬

environments range from mountainous rain

indigenous experience.

tional Year of the World’s Indigenous

forest to desert, from tundra to tropical island,

People, follows:

from isolated village to the heart of Manhat¬

Indigenous Politics

tan. Some hunt and kill their food daily,

at the International Level

the United Nations General Assembly,
10 December 1992

Human Rights Day, which marks fortyfive years since the adoption of the
Declaration of Human Rights, is a day

others phone in an order for pizza delivery,-

Indigenous issues have long been considered

that should rightly be commemorated

some are fighting in armed struggle, others

the sole jurisdiction of nation-states. This

by all mankind. For we Ainu, who

are fighting rush-hour traffic In other words,

categorization made it possible for govern¬

have formed a distinct society and

although the term "indigenous peoples" refers

ments to maintain their assimilation policies

lands, and southern Sakhalin from

to a collectivity, it is a global collectivity of

while ignoring the wide economic and social

time immemorial, there is yet another

distinct peoples whose cultures, languages, and

gap between indigenous and majority popu¬

reason today will have special signifi¬

lifestyles are arguably as diverse as those

lations. Two key developments in the latter

culture in Hokkaido, the Kurile Is¬

cance in our history. This is because

among nonindigenous peoples. Given this

half of this century, however, marked a

the Japanese government denied

diversity, one may wonder what inspires and

monumental change in the international

even our existence in its proud claim

enables many Ainu to actively seek ties with

treatment of indigenous matters. The first,

that Japan, alone in the world, is a

other indigenous groups.

developed largely through the Llnited Na¬

up until 1986, a mere six years ago,

“monoethnic nation.” Here today,
however, our existence is being

A common historical experience and its

tions system, was that human rights be

clearly recognized by the United Na¬

enduring legacies have played a key role in

tions itself. In the eyes of the govern-

propelling Ainu activists into the global indig¬

In the wake of World War II, the interna¬

ment, we were a people whose exist¬

enous movement. Renamed Hokkaido in 1869,

tional community of nations was forced to

ence must not be admitted. You need

established as a focus of international law.

the greatest portion of Ainu land officially

admit that human-rights violations were

nitely not a ghost. I am standing here

became Japan's first colonial conquest during its

often committed by governments themselves

firmly before you. (UN 182264)

imperialistic expansion in Asia. Thereafter the

and that explicit measures were necessary in

Ainu were, by law, denied the freedom and

order to protect the fundamental freedoms

not worry, however, I am most defi¬

49 / INTERNATIONAL

arena

359

and basic human rights of the world's peoples.

Of particular importance are two annual

This led to the formulation of what is known

working groups on indigenous matters now

collectively as the International Bill of Human

being held at the United Nations headquarters

Rights—five documents, including the Interna¬

in Geneva, Switzerland. First convened in

tional Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,

1982, the Working Group on Indigenous

which elaborate basic rights such as self-

Populations (WGIP) has two mandates: to

determination, political participation, freedom

review specific developments pertaining to the

of thought and religion, the right to work and

promotion and protection of human rights of

to equal pay, to social security, to food, educa¬

indigenous peoples, and to work toward

tion, health care, and to an adequate standard

standards enunciating those rights. In addition

of living. The inclusion of human-rights instru¬

to the designations of 1993 as the International

ments in international law provides a frame¬

Year of the World's Indigenous Peoples and

work of standards that nations must seek to

1994 as the beginning of the International

appropriate or else suffer the criticism or

Decade of the World's Indigenous Peoples, the

condemnation of the international community.

WGIP produced a landmark draft document,

At the same time, many in the world commu¬

"Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous

nity recognized that existing instruments did

Peoples," the guiding principle of which is the

not sufficiently address indigenous circum¬

collective right to self-determination. Discus¬

stances, specifically, they do not accord

sions on treaties, sustainable development,

indigenous peoples the right to self-determi¬

and the establishment of a permanent forum

nation as peoples,- this is a right all indigenous

for indigenous peoples within the UN system

communities enjoyed before being dominated

are also among the issues taken up by the

by a nation-state. Put simply, while all other

WGIP. A higher-level Intersessional Working

peoples in the world enjoy the right to self-

Group, established in 1995 under the Com¬

determination, indigenous peoples no longer

mission for Human Rights, is now charged

do. Without this right to decide for them¬

with elaborating on the draft declaration

selves how best to promote and preserve their

created in the WGIP.

culture, the very identity of an indigenous
community is left to the whims of an external
power.
With this in mind, indigenous activists and

360

Global Action
as a Strategy for Change
Japanese society does not exist in a vacuum,

nongovernmental organizations around the

and domestic policy is by no means driven by

world began demanding that governments

internal factors alone. There is solid evidence

acknowledge responsibility for the current

to suggest that the Ainu can expect successes

circumstances of the world's indigenous

in the global indigenous movement to pro¬

peoples and give back to them the right to

vide significant leverage against the Japanese

decide the course of their communities. This

government. A precursory look at its legal

burgeoning activism by indigenous peoples

track record shows that the government is far

themselves was the second factor that focused

more apt to enact or reform domestic law

international attention on indigenous issues:

when it risks being judged from the outside—

through their efforts, indigenous issues now

specifically by powerful nations—as falling

have a place on the agenda of many interna¬

below international human-rights standards.

tional and multilateral conferences and are a

There have been many cases wherein pressure

growing focus within the United Nations

from outside Japan—in the form of human-

system. In order to prevent history from

rights law—has been the key force behind

repeating itself, in the form of new "prescrip¬

dramatic changes in the government's domes¬

tive" measures by governments as inappropri¬

tic policy. At least eight laws that had long

ate as those enacted in the past, the active

been under fire for violating the rights of

participation of indigenous representatives

resident foreigners and refugees were re¬

themselves is crucial. One example is the

formed only when the Japanese government

significant input from indigenous representa¬

ratified the International Covenant on Eco¬

tives that is reflected in the International

nomic, Social, and Cultural Rights (1979), the

Labor Organization's (ILO) Convention on

International Covenant on Civil and Political

Indigenous Peoples (No. 169), which in 1989

Rights (1980), and the Covenant Relating to

replaced ILO Convention 107 and its under¬

the Status of Refugees (1982). Similarly, the

lying philosophy of assimilation.

government passed the Equal Employment

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. DIETZ

Opportunity Law in 1985, the same year in

Alaska in the late 1970s and witnessing the

which it ratified the UN Convention on the

relative autonomy enjoyed by minorities

Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination

(and especially indigenous communities) in

Against Women.

those areas, the leaders of the Amu Associa¬

The influence of outside judgment is

tion of Hokkaido demanded that the Japa¬

likewise evident in changes in the Japanese

nese government enact a new law to replace

government's official position toward the Ainu

its 1899 F-lokkaido Former Aborigines Pro¬

m the past twenty years, which have resulted

tection Act (Siddle 1996). In 1984 the Ainu

largely from developments at the interna¬

Association and the Hokkaido prefectural

tional level and from participation by Ainu

government jointly submitted a draft for a

activists in the global indigenous movement.

new law, one based on indigenous rights.

As a signatory to the International Covenant

The year 1986 proved to be a turning point

on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), which it

in Ainu politics: Prime Minister Yasuhiro

ratilied in 1979, the Japanese government is

Nakasone made his now infamous statement

required to report periodically on the measures

that Japan was a "monoracial" society. Deter¬

it has adopted to ensure the protection of the

mined to refute this claim, the first Ainu

rights contained in the covenant. Of great

delegation attended the WG1P in the sum¬

significance to the Ainu is Article 27 of the

mer of 1987. When the government submit¬
ted its second periodic report in December
of the same year, although it did not use the
term "minority" found in Article 27, it did
acknowledge that the Ainu "preserve their
own religion and language, and maintain
their own culture."
With Ainu presence at the LIN and
other international forums, the Japanese
government is not only compelled to re¬
spond to their demands as never before, but
it is now also increasingly obliged to respond
in the international arena In addition to
their ongoing participation in both LIN
working groups and contribution to the
development of ILO Convention 169, since
the 1980s Ainu representatives have attended

49.2

Ainu Demonstration in Tokyo,

1992

On March 27, 1992, Hokkaido Utari

ICCPR, which concerns "ethnic, religious, or

major conferences on indigenous issues in

linguistic minorities" living within a state and

Asia, Oceania, North America, Greenland,

their right to "enjoy their own culture, to

Europe, Africa, and Siberia. These include

Kyokai (Ainu Association of Hokkaido)

profess and practice their own religion, or to

participation in several nongovernmental

petition the Japanese government for

use their own language" The four reports

organization co-summits held in conjunction

quick passage of the Ainu Shinpo, a

submitted by the Japanese government thus far,

with major conferences such as the LIN

new law protecting the civil and cul¬

specifically its statements regarding Article 27,

Conferences on Women in Nairobi and

show the gradual evolution of Japan's official

Beijing. The Japanese government started

stance toward the Ainu.

sending a representative to the LIN working

organized a demonstration in Tokyo to

tural rights of the Ainu people. Most of
the five hundred people who marched
to the Diet Building of the Japanese
government wore traditional Ainu robes.

The initial change was one of simple

This was the culmination of an interna¬

recognition. In its first report to the ICCPR in

participating and, beginning with its third

tional campaign for indigenous rights

1980 the Japanese government denied the

periodic report in 1991, added general

that began to make its way into the vil¬

very existence of the Ainu, briefly stating that

information (referring track as far as 1974) on

lages of the Ainu during the 1970s.

groups after the Ainu themselves began

"minorities of the kind mentioned in the

its welfare initiatives, including a planned

Covenant do not exist in Japan." By the time

budget increase aimed at "improving their

it was due to submit its second report seven

living environment."

years later, however, actions by the Ainu had
made it difficult for the government to con¬

The Struggle for Recognition

tinue to deny their existence. Ainu representa¬

Government recognition of the Ainu —

tives attended international indigenous confer¬

beyond mere acknowledgment of their

ences in Greenland and Asia in the early

existence—remains a highly politicized

1980s,■ also, having traveled to China and

issue. The 1991 report contained the

49 / INTERNATIONAL

ARENA

36 i

government's first official recognition of the

The issue of recognition intensified in

Ainu as an "ethnic minority," but in keeping

1997, when, in a landmark ruling, the

with the position it has steadfastly maintained

Sapporo District Court recognized the Ainu

at the UN working groups, the Japanese

as an indigenous minority within Japan. Two

government refuses to recognize the Ainu as

Ainu living in Nibutani, a farming village

an indigenous minority. Japan, along with some

where Ainu make up nearly 80 percent of the

other Asian governments, maintains that in

population, filed a lawsuit against the central

the absence of an official, internationally

government challenging the legality of the

accepted "objective definition" of the term

government's expropriation of their land for

"indigenous peoples" (senju minzoku), it cannot

the purposes of constructing a dam. Among

make such a determination. To be sure, the

other violations, the dam would flood land

Ainu do not seek this acknowledgment out

sacred to the Ainu, including the traditional

of a need to confirm their own identity,- for

site of the chip-sanke, a boat-launching cer¬

them it is a human-rights issue (fig. 49.2).

emony performed annually on the river.

Like many other indigenous groups, their

Arguing that the dam would irretrievably

chance for greater autonomy and guarantees

impinge on their right to practice their cul¬

against political and economic neglect hinges

ture, the plaintiffs invoked the provisions in

in no small part on official recognition by the

Article 27 of the ICCPR as a central part of

Japanese government. It will help to ensure

their legal argument. Because construction of

that Japan will face criticism if it does not

the dam was completed by the time the case

comply with international instruments con¬

came to an end and the land under question

taining provisions regarding the rights of

was already submerged, the court dismissed

indigenous peoples. For the Japanese govern¬

the plaintiff's primary claim to return their

ment, acknowledging the Ainu as an indig¬

land. It nonetheless found the expropriation

enous minority is an economic and social

of the land to be illegal because the govern¬

issue: it runs the risk of having to allow Ainu

ment did not attempt to assess the negative

the freedom to catch salmon in Hokkaido

impact of the dam on Ainu culture and the

rivers, to allow Ainu history, language, and

plaintiffs' ability to practice their culture.

culture to be taught in the public schools,

The court decision revealed a contradic¬

and to allow the Ainu a greater say in their

tion in the government's current stance on

own affairs.

the "indigenous question." Although the

It is evident that the Japanese

government maintains that it cannot identify

government's refusal to recognize the Ainu as

the Ainu as indigenous without an interna¬

an indigenous people rings hollow with the

tionally accepted definition, the court based

world community. Perhaps the greatest coup

its decision on its finding that the Ainu fall

for the Ainu to date came in 1993 when

within the general understanding of the term

Ciichi Nomura, then head of the Ainu Asso¬

"indigenous peoples" at the international

ciation of FJokkaido, was invited to speak to

level. The verdict reads that "the Ainu

the United Nations General Assembly at the

people have inhabited mainly Hokkaido,

49.3 Toroshino Kaizawa (1889-1982)

opening ceremony marking the International

maintaining their distinct culture and iden¬

Toroshino Kaizawa-fuch/', a very re¬

Year of the World's Indigenous Peoples (fig.

tity, before Japan extended its rule over

49.1). Also notable are official visits in 1992

them, and they still form a social group with

and 1993, respectively, to the Ainu commu¬

a distinct culture and identity. . . ."(Sapporo

of 1899 and World Wars I and II with¬

nity by Erica-Irene Daes, chairperson of the

Chiho Sai-bansho 1997: 75-76). The court

out witnessing an effective solution to

WGIP, and Rigoberta Menchu Turn, Goodwill

made this determination after referring to

the institutional discrimination that pre¬

Ambassador for the International Year and

international legal texts (for example, 1LO

vented Ainu from advancing in Japa¬

winner of the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize. At a

Convention 169) and a "working definition"

1997 ceremony commemorating twenty years

currently in use. That the judicial branch of

spected woman from the Nibutani area,
lived through the passage of the Hok¬
kaido Former Aborigines Protection Act

nese society. As the international cam¬
paign for indigenous rights made its
way into Ainu villages, even the older

of collective action by indigenous peoples at

the government found these to be reliable

generation, whose many grievances had

the UN, an Ainu activist was chosen by the

standards for determining the indigenous

been ignored by the dominant society,

indigenous representatives from Asia to speak

status of the Ainu sets a powerful precedent

became excited that maybe this time

on behalf of the region. In the same year, a

for the application of international law in

young Ainu woman was one of four indigenous

Japan's domestic courts. Moreover, the

fairness would prevail. Unfortunately,
few of the elders lived to see the im¬

representatives chosen to be the first to partici¬

government made no move to appeal the

international pressure had on the Japa¬

pate in a six-month internship program at the

court's decision within the allotted period,

nese government. (NAA: Hilger)

LIN Center for Human Rights in Geneva.

indicating that it saw no way to refute the

362

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. DIETZ

pact that twenty-five years of positive

court's decision or the basis for its decision:

tional community on developments within

that the Ainu are an indigenous minority.

Japan from the Ainu perspective (fig. 49.5).

That there has been significant change
in the government's stance in the span of

(fig. 49.4) cited the Japanese government's

out, however, that this has not translated into

Ainu Shinpo as an example of "potential co¬

policies that better their daily lives and that

optation of indigenous culture by a govern¬

recent government initiatives run counter to

ment." In addition to the government's

international trends. Some governments

narrow definition of Ainu culture, he referred

around the world are now addressing their

to provisions that give the Prime Minister's

responsibility by offering official and public

office, the Ministry of Education, and the

apologies for past aggressions and racist

Hokkaido Development Agency the author¬

policies, recognizing semi-autonomous re¬

ity to decide what specifically will be tar¬

gions, and implementing such measures as

geted for promotion, who will receive fund¬

land compensation schemes and native educa¬

ing for such promotion, the extent of such

tion systems. Although the Japanese govern¬

funding, and so on. The Japanese govern¬

ment abolished the hundred-year-old Hok¬

ment representative listened along with the

kaido Former Aborigines Protection Act in

rest of the working group—UN member-

1997—the blueprint for its assimilation

states, UN bodies such as the World Health

policies—many in the Ainu community were

Organization and the International Labor

angered when the government offered neither

Organization, and international human-

reflection nor apology. In its place, and amid

rights organizations and indigenous repre¬

great fanfare, the government enacted the

sentatives from around the world—as Kano

Ainu Shinpo.

explained how the government's new law

Oki Kano, Ainu Musician

Ainu music as a vehicle, Oki Kano
began to popularize Ainu culture and

actually runs counter to the principles con¬

controversial, however. Although the govern¬

tained in the draft Declaration for the Rights

ment hails it as the country's first "ethnic law,"

of Indigenous Peoples.

the Ainu community is expressing dissatisfac¬

During the 1990s, using traditional

Working Group, Ainu participant Oki Kano

twenty years is indisputable. Many Ainu point

The long-awaited legislation remains

49.4

In his intervention at the 1997 International

Adding to the controversy, and indeed

tion over the fact that the Aino Shinpo no

the confusion, was the timing of the law's

longer resembles the official draft submitted

adoption. The Nibutani verdict was handed

by the Hokkaido prefectural government and

down on March 27, 1997, just six days after

the Ainu Association. The new law provides

the Cabinet formally accepted the final draft

for the promotion of Ainu culture in order "to

of the Ainu Shinpo, which had been stripped

realize a society that will respect the ethnic

of any mention of indigenous rights or the

pride of Ainu individuals" and to "contribute

Ainu as an indigenous people. With height¬

to the development of Japan's diverse culture"

ened media attention, the government faced

(emphasis added). It is a source of consider¬

demands from Ainu leaders to reincorporate

able funding to study or teach Ainu language,

recognition of their indigenous rights

traditional crafts, and other general aspects of

(senjuken) into the draft before it moved to the

Ainu culture, be the applicant Ainu, Japanese,

Diet for formal passage into law. There was

or even a foreign scholar of Ainu culture, but

considerable debate within the government's

genre. His performances in Japan

most Ainu argue that the redrafted version has

ruling coalition but not about the term "in¬

and overseas have helped the inter¬

no meaning for the vast majority of the

digenous rights",- rather, the debate was

national community gain an aware¬

community. It will benefit instead only those

suddenly over whether to include recogni¬

ness of Ainu culture, musical tradi¬

who have the luxury of time and an interest in

tion of the "indigenous nature" (senjusei) of

traditional Ainu culture. Promoting a stable

the Ainu. The government's interpretation is

rights, carrying on the work begun by
his father, Bikky Sunazawa, in a new

tions, and the aspirations of modem
Ainu people. His participation in "new

lifestyle through non-welfare-based eco¬

that although the Ainu lived in Hokkaido

the viability of Ainu traditions in evolv¬

nomic assistance was one element of the 1984

before the ethnic Japanese, it was not Ainu

ing modern tradition.

draft, a holistic document that guaranteed the

territory. In a press conference the day

age" musical ensembles has shown

economic, social, and cultural rights of the

following the Nibutani decision, Prime Min¬

Ainu as an indigenous people.

ister Hashimoto himself had stated that it was

International conferences, and the

"historical fact" that the Ainu lived in Hok¬

working groups in particular, not only provide

kaido before the Japanese. Although this was

the Ainu with opportunities to build a global

hailed by the media as a turning point for the

network and enhance their strategies but also

Ainu, reports show that in the past several

offer a valuable forum to update the interna¬

prime ministers have referred officially to the

49 / INTERNATIONAL

ARENA

363

"indigenous nature" of the Ainu in speeches or

officially accepted the new law despite its

writing (Uemura 1997). After much debate

drastic redrafting by the government has led

within the ruling coalition, it was finally deter¬

to considerable frustration and disillusionment

mined that to revise the text of the Ainu

with this organization. Although the Associa¬

Shinpo would pose a "technical difficulty."

tion was for many years the most visible pres¬

Instead, the cabinet adopted a special resolu¬

ence at the UN and other forums, a marked

tion of consent confirming the prime minister's

shift has occurred in recent years as a handful

statement, and the government's "new" stance

of "nonaligned" Ainu activists have begun

was included in its most recent report to the

participating internationally. Indicative of their

ICCPR, submitted in July 1997. It acknowl¬

overall strategy, this new generation of par¬

edged that the Ainu "lived in Hokkaido . . .

ticipants is putting a great deal of energy into

even before the Wajin [ethnic Japanese],” yet

studying international human-rights law.

the land on which they lived was and is "inherent

Within Japan, reluctance to assert one's

Japanese territory" (emphasis added,- ICCPR 1997).

Ainu identity for fear of the social conse¬

It must be stressed that, for Japan, ac¬

quences remains an enormous barrier to

knowledging the Ainu as an "indigenous

mobilization of the Ainu community, thus

people" has economic and even territorial

leaving it without strong organized represen¬

implications beyond the domestic sphere.

tation In many ways action at the interna¬

The Japanese government is currently negoti¬

tional level transcends these political and

ating with Russia over joint development and

social obstacles found in the domestic arena

eventual return of what is referred to as the

at the same time it offers the Ainu opportuni¬

Northern Territories, a

ties for effective collective action.

group of islands off the
northeast coast of

Grassroots Exchange

Hokkaido that were

While the UN working groups and other

seized by the Soviet

high-profile conferences remain powerful

Union in the final days

sites for activism, Ainu involvement in the

of World War II. The

international arena takes many forms, all of

dispute over the is¬

which are significant. Early "diplomacy" took

lands—Etorofu,

place in the form of participation in world's

Kunashiri, Shikotan,

fairs and cultural expositions. Since the 1970s

and the Habomai

Ainu have sought to expand their community-

group of islets—has

level ties with other indigenous communities:

kept the two countries

countless Ainu groups and individuals have

from ever signing a

visited and hosted indigenous peoples living

49.5 Think Globally, Act Locally

peace treaty, for the Japanese government has

in North America, Oceania, Asia, Siberia, and

While important developments were

maintained that the islands are a part of Japan.

northern Europe,- a conference billed as the

At a bilateral summit in 1997, Russian Presi¬

"Nibutani Forum," held in 1993 to commemo¬

dent Boris Yeltsin and Prime Minister Ryutaro

rate the International Year, was attended by

advancing through symposia such as

Hashimoto pledged to work toward the sign¬

representatives of twenty-seven indigenous

the one, pictured here, held at Nibutani

ing of a peace treaty by the year 2000. With

peoples (fig. 49.5), and another large-scale

economic development of—and ultimately

conference is planned for 1999. Such meet¬

sovereignty over—the disputed islands at the

ings within Japan, along with visits by other

very center of the high-level negotiations now

indigenous groups, are important because

taking place on the international scene,
local programs like the development of
the Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum were

in 1993. (NACH)

taking place, for the Japanese government to

they raise awareness among the vast majority

alter its position that Hokkaido is Japan's

of Ainu who do not participate in the inter¬

"inherent territory" would no doubt weaken its

national arena, helping to strengthen the

claim to the Northern Territories.

collective identity among the Ainu them¬

In addition to the present political envi¬
ronment in Japan, such social realities as a lack

over, because of a general apathy toward

of cohesive representation among the Ainu and

human-rights issues among the general public,

discrimination by the general population shed

the publicity surrounding such activities is

additional light on why many Ainu activists are

critical because it serves to educate the non-

extending their activities into the international

Ainu population.

arena. That the Ainu Association of Hokkaido,
which remains the largest Ainu organization,

364

selves and mobilize many to action. More¬

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. DIETZ

Grassroots-level contact between Ainu
and other indigenous groups often fosters

lasting ties, leading to greater opportunities

right, others as autonomous regions within

for action, political or otherwise. An example

existing countries, all as the arbiters of their

is cooperation with indigenous activists living

own will. The Ainu have much to gain and

on the island of Sakhalin (just north of

little to lose from participating in the interna¬

Hokkaido) regarding the current negotiations

tional indigenous movement. Like many

over the development and possession of the

countries, Japan has long tried to keep interna¬

disputed Northern Territories. Several Ainu

tional developments out of its internal affairs

groups have also established regular visits

and its domestic politics separate from its

with indigenous communities in various

international affairs. A look at developments

countries,- one such organization travels

over the past twenty years indicates, however,

annually to a community in British Columbia

that the domestic and the international are

with the aim of experiencing together their

becoming increasingly intertwined. Although

shared traditions, such as teaching traditional

the Japanese government is growing more

hunting methods to the children of both

responsive to Ainu issues, recent moves suggest

communities. Study tours to North American

that the Ainu community has a struggle ahead

and European museums with Ainu collec¬

before they will enjoy any form of self-determi¬

tions, joint exhibitions, and even collabora¬

nation, even the right to administer their

tive music ventures with other indigenous

internal affairs. This fact is motivating many

peoples are other examples of Ainu activity in

Ainu to utilize their limited resources to partici¬

the international arena.

pate at the international level, inspired by the

It is clear, then, that not all activities are
explicitly political, cultural exchange with

enous movement will help them achieve

other indigenous groups remains a primary

success at home. Indeed, it is providing neces¬

motivation for grassroots-level contact.

sary and effective leverage against the Japanese

Nevertheless, through this interaction the

government, not least of which is the un¬

Ainu are better able to consider their own

equivocal confirmation of their indigenous

situation in Japan as they share information

identity by the international community.

and learn of indigenous circumstances in other
countries, existing human-rights laws, and

49.6

Masahiro Nomoto

belief that involvement in the global indig¬

Developing a global network among
other indigenous groups and concerned

indigenous-rights instruments now being

nongovernmental organizations provides

formulated within the UN system and other

Ainu activists with opportunities for ex¬

multilateral bodies such as the Organization of

changing information and strategies and

American States, the European Union, and the

gaining confidence in their own efforts.

Organization of African Unity. Use of such an

Because many gains of the global indigenous

"international measuring stick" has long been

movement (such as the adoption of the

an impetus for Ainu activism. Interviews with

declaration now under deliberation at the

Masahiro Nomoto (born 1963) is one

Ainu activists indicate that as they become

LIN) will benefit the Ainu community as a

of the young leaders bringing Ainu

aware of the successes achieved by other

whole, international activism can often

indigenous movements, they gain confidence

transcend most major political and social

in their own ability to make a difference for

obstacles to domestic activism. Furthermore,

culture to a broader world. Nomoto,
who serves as curator at the Ainu
Museum at Shiraoi, is skilled as a
carver and possesses a deep knowl¬

the Ainu and are encouraged to continue and

the proliferation of formal and informal

edge of Ainu culture and traditions.

even step up their own activities. Be it at the

coalitions has provided the Ainu with more

His participation in international meet¬

UN in Geneva or in a rural village in British

avenues for collective action, including

ings—like the 1997 Conference on

Columbia, interaction with other indigenous

meaningful exchange at the grassroots level.

Hunting and Gathering Societies in
Darwin, Australia, where he performed
the sword dance, pictured here—and
his collaboration on Ainu: Spirit of a

Northern People have helped broaden
contemporary understanding of Ainu
culture and concerns.

groups is having a significant impact on those

By moving into the international arena

Ainu who participate in such exchanges and

and uniting with those who share similar

on the Ainu situation in general.

histories and the legacies of those histories,

In the midst of a changing global environ¬

the Ainu are proving that they remain a

ment, indigenous activists are demanding their

distinct people who are willing to fight for a

right to equal participation in the international

greater degree of control over the future of

community—some as nations in their own

their community.

49 / INTERNATIONAL

ARENA

365

O

n July 1, 1997, the Ainu

doubtedly helped to improve such living

Law") was enacted. The law,

conditions as housing and employment, it has

whose intent can be summed

The Ainu
Shinpo:
A New Beginning
Terliki Tsunemoto

disparities. Although the measure has un¬

Shinpo (literally, "Ainu New

not necessarily met the real needs of the Ainu

up by its official description, "Law on Promo¬

people. It did not guarantee the participation

tion of Ainu Culture and Facilitation of Popular

of the Ainu in its planning and implementa¬

Understanding of Ainu Tradition," acknowledges

tion, and it failed to address the issues of

for the first time in Japan the existence of a

discrimination and the conservation of ethnic

separate ethnic group inside the country and

culture and heritage. In the 1970s the grow¬

calls for respect of its culture and traditions. For

ing international movement for indigenous

Japan, which until recently officially saw itself as

rights prompted the Ainu to campaign for a

a homogeneous nation, that recognition is a

new law to establish their status as an indig¬

landmark, which lends the bill its significance.

enous population (fig. 50.1).

The Ainu in Hokkaido enjoyed their
own culture before Japanese people from

The Ainu Shinpo

Honshu arrived. Subsequently, the Ainu way

In 1984 the Ainu Association of Hokkaido, the

of life became extremely impoverished due to

largest Ainu political group, drafted a new law

harsh pressure from the immigrant Japanese,

to replace the Hokkaido Former Aborigines

for they were prohibited from using their own

Protection Act. The Ainu Affairs Council,

language and were forced to give up much of

which was appointed by the Governor of

their culture. In 1899 the Meiji government

Hokkaido and recommended the introduction
of the law in March 1988, summarized the
association's draft in the following five points:
(1) declaration of basic human rights to elimi¬
nate discrimination,- (2) reinforcement of the
protection of human rights,- (3) promotion of
the Ainu culture,- (4) establishment of the Fund
for Ainu Self-reliance,- and (5) establishment of
consultative bodies on Ainu policies.
The council, consisting of representa¬
tives of the Ainu and law professors, among
others, adopted the concept of senjuken, "in¬
digenous rights," as the basis for enactment of
the new law, with indigenous rights defined as
the inherent right of the Ainu population to
land, resources, and culture, as well as politi¬
cal self-determination in appropriate cases.
The emphasis on indigenous rights was based
on the historical fact that the Ainu are the
indigenous population of Hokkaido and
should be recognized legally as such. The fact
that the Japanese government in 1899 had

50.1 Tokyo, 1992

enacted the Hokkaido Former Aborigines

enacted the Hokkaido Former Aborigines

Protection Act—similar to the Daws Act in

Protection Act in order to force the assimila¬

the United States—which tried to force the

tion of the Ainu was a de facto recognition

origines Protection Act of 1899,

Ainu to assimilate into Japanese society as

that the Ainu were a separate ethnic group

which still governed Ainu relations

farmers, but the attempt was unsuccessful.

In 1992 Ainu staged a rally in
Tokyo to gain support for replacing
the archaic Elokkaido Former Ab¬

with Japan, with new legislation.
The Act for the Promotion of Ainu
Culture, also known as the Ainu

Today the population of Amu living in
Hokkaido is estimated to be between 24,000

for the Ainu in the Diet (the Japanese Na¬

and 50,000, and many have continued to

tional Parliament) as well as in local assem¬

suffer from social and economic disparities

blies, this idea was rejected by the govern¬

Shinpo, was finally enacted on July
1, 1997, but many Ainu are dis¬
pleased because it ignores political

and discrimination. Since 1974, however, the

ment on the grounds that it would contravene

issues and only supports the pro¬

national government of Japan and the Hok¬

constitutional provisions mandating the

motion of Ainu culture and lan¬

kaido prefectural government have been

equality of voting rights and representation of

trying to implement the Hokkaido Ainu

"all the people" by Diet members.

guage.

Welfare Measure in order to rectify these

366

native to Hokkaido. While the association's
proposal included designation of special seats

PRESENT AND FUTURE IT. TSUNEMOTO

In March 1995 the Japanese govern-

merit, led by Prime Minister Murayama from

the panel's report was delivered. The govern¬

the Social Democratic Party, convened the

ment was also concerned over such poten¬

Experts Meeting on Ainu Measures, headed

tially difficult issues as political self-determi¬

by a former supreme court justice, to discuss

nation and compensation for land taken from

new Ainu policies,- its members included

the Ainu (fig. 50.2).

constitutional scholars, specialists on ethnic
and gender studies, novelists, and the gover¬

The Ainu Shinpo and

nor of Hokkaido. The panel submitted its

the Nibutani Decision

report in April 1994, after one year of delib¬

The Hokkaido Development Agency, the

eration. This document stated that the Ainu

Education Ministry, and the Prime Minister's

are indigenous to Hokkaido, having lived

Office are designated as the enforcement

there long before the arrival of the Japanese,

agencies of the Ainu Shinpo. The purpose of

and are an ethnic group with their own cul¬

the act was "the realization of a society

ture. Based on this, the panel recommended

where the pride of the Ainu is respected," to

promotion of the Ainu culture as a source of

he brought about by the promotion of Ainu

identity that would enhance the public's

culture and tradition. Specific measures call

understanding of the Ainu and eliminate

for the establishment of legally defined

discrimination.

organizations for the promotion of research

However, the panel avoided judgment

on the Ainu people and culture, including

on the issue of the Ainu's "indigenousness."

language, music, dance, and crafts (fig. 50.3),-

(Although the Japanese government has

the participation of the Ainu people in
managing such organizations was also guar¬
anteed. In addition, the Hokkaido govern¬
ment, assisted by the central government, is
planning to secure a large tract of land to
create a site where Ainu traditional skills can
be researched and reconstructed, as well as
to facilitate further cultural development for
the implementation of the spirit of the law.
Although the law is obviously a positive step,
it still does not directly address the legal
issues of senjuken, the indigenous rights of the
Ainu, and by that omission does not recog¬
nize that such rights exist.
On March 27, 1997, however, the
Sapporo District Court in Hokkaido made a
decision that seemed in conflict with the
government position. In a ruling on a case
over the dam construction on the Saru River
in Hokkaido's Nibutani region, an area
considered sacred by the Ainu, the court

50.2 Ainu Lands and Resources
Unlike many indigenous peoples of
the world who won remuneration for

acknowledged the Ainu as a minority popula¬

found that the government failed to mitigate

tion, it has never officially recognized them as

the negative impact of dam construction on

indigenous people, citing as cause for its

the culture of the Ainu, and that was illegal.

were absorbed into larger states, the

inaction that such rights have not yet been

Although the court stated that the completed

Ainu have never received consider¬

defined internationally.) The report also failed

dam cannot be demolished, the dramatic

ation for their claims to traditional

to include any specific measures to help pro¬

opinion included extremely important points

homelands in Hokkaido, the Kuriles,

mote social and economic independence for

that were at odds with the national

the Ainu. The panel chose to recommend only

government's position, to wit: (I) The Ainu

those measures that could be implemented

are an indigenous people in view of the

immediately, based on such considerations as

international definition suggested in various

the current situation between the Ainu and the

documents, including the 1989 International

lands and resources lost when they

and Sakhalin. In all of these regions,
Ainu interests have been ignored as
the Japanese and Russian govern¬
ments advanced their national inter¬
ests and territorial claims. (NAA-3-11)

Japanese,- the Japanese government position on

Labor Organization's Convention on Indig¬

indigenous rights, which was less advanced

enous Peoples (no. 169) and the Cobo

than the international standard,- and the sched¬

Report,- (2) Article 27 of the International

uling of legislative actions immediately after

Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,

50 / AINU SHINPO

LAW

367

50.3

Continuity and Change

decision, and neither party filed an appeal.

Ainu continue to pass on their tradi¬

Following the court decision, Prime

tions and values to younger genera¬

Minister Ryutaro Fdashimoto acknowledged

tions. Although the financial and moral

the historical fact that the Ainu lived in

support provided by the Ainu Shinpo
has been a focus for cultural revitaliza¬

Fdokkaido before the Japanese. Although the

tion, the continuance of Ainu traditions

Ainu Shinpo did not address their indigenous¬

lies with the Ainu people themselves.

ness, a supplemental resolution in the Diet

Despite modernization and increasing

recognized it unanimously. Although a

social integration, Ainu festivals, cer¬

supplementary resolution has no binding

emonial events, art exhibitions, and
arts workshops have given Ainu people

power, this declaration of the Diet, the high¬

a new sense of optimism about the

est legislative body, will have significant

survival of their culture.

impact on future developments regarding the
Ainu. The Japanese government will have to
weigh the significance of this resolution to
determine its position on the Declaration on
Indigenous Rights currently being debated
before the United Nations.
Many unaddressed issues remain con¬
cerning the Ainu Shinpo because it focuses
solely on cultural promotion,- however, in
Japan, a country that has chosen not to admit
any kind of ethnic problem, perhaps there

368

legally binding domestically, guarantees the

was no realistic alternative but to begin with

cultural rights of a person belonging to a minor¬

benign but important issues on which consen¬

ity,- and (3) Article 13 of the Japanese constitu¬

sus-building was relatively easy. The most

tion makes the government responsible for

important goal is to create a climate of self-

protecting a minority member's cultural rights, a

determination, a society where the Ainu

responsibility that is greater in the case of an

people, if they choose to live as Ainu, can live

indigenous minority because the indigenous

with pride and free from discrimination. It is

people were forced to be a minority in the

no exaggeration to say that everything pro¬

nation It was a surprising, epoch-making

ceeds from this fundamental idea.

PRESENT AND

FUTURE / T. TSUNEMOTO

W

e, the Ainu people, the

51/ Beyond the
Ainu Shinpo:
An Ainu View
Jiro Sasamura

resources (plants, fish, game)—for gold

indigenous population of

mining. The largest of these confrontations

northern Japan, have lived in

was a battle in 1669 when more than 20,000

northern Japan (the Tohoku

Ainu, led by the hero Shakushain, rose against

district of northern Honshu and Hokkaido),

the Japanese to defend their people and way

Sakhalin, and the Kuriles since the ancient days,

of life, but it ended in defeat. Although the

with our own language and culture. According

Ainu waged other battles around the same

to a Hokkaido government survey in 1993,

time, they were not victorious. Japanese rule

there are about 24,000 Ainu in Hokkaido,- if the

was fortified by each victory, and their de¬

Ainu people living in other parts of Japan, who

mands became even more unreasonable.

were not covered in the survey, were included,

When the Meiji Restoration began in

the estimated population would increase by

1868, the modernization of Japan caused the

several tens of thousands.

central government to pay serious attention to

Many Ainu people are economically

the exploration and economic development of

disadvantaged as a result of societal and histori¬

Hokkaido. A year later the Hokkaido Settle¬

cal circumstances that unfortunately have bred

ment Mission was established as an administra¬

prejudice and contempt toward them. How¬

tive organization to rule the region, and a large

ever, there is a new confidence in Ainu identity

number of former samurai warriors and farmers

and a commitment to the preservation of Ainu

emigrated to Hokkaido. Ainu mosir ("the people's

traditional culture and the improvement of

land"), where the Ainu people had freely

social and economic status.

hunted and gathered food, was regarded by the
Japanese as a land with no master, and it be¬

51.1 Schools and Culture

During the early part of the twentieth

came a part of the territory of Japan and was

century Ainu children were assigned to

allocated to Japanese immigrants.

attend special Ainu schools, as many

The Ainu people were classified as

Native Americans were in the United

"Japanese" and forced to assimilate into

States, in the belief that Ainu children

Japanese society. They were prohibited from

could not keep up intellectually with

using their own language, even at home,-

Japanese children. The Regulation for
the Education of Former Aborigines’

they were not allowed to practice Ainu

Children, which was promulgated in

customs and public ceremonies,- and they

1901 to provide primary-school edu¬

were forced to engage in newly imported

cation for Ainu children, was abol¬

rice agricultural systems with which they

ished in 1936 when the negative re¬

were unfamiliar. Although the language and

sults of ethnic segregation in school¬
ing became apparent. Since then

culture were on the verge of extinction, they

Ainu children have been integrated

were kept alive, albeit in a small way, by

into Japanese schools, but many Ainu

those who cared about Ainu traditions.

children still face severe discrimina¬

Today, a concerted effort to restore the

tion from their schoolmates. (Hilger:

traditional culture is making steady progress.

NAA-4-14)

In 1899, exactly one hundred years ago,
the Japanese government enacted the Hok¬
kaido Former Aborigines Protection Act as a
means to accelerate the assimilation of the Ainu
people. Although the stated purpose of the law
was to help the Ainu by allocating land, assist¬
ing the poor, and providing education to the
The Ainu people led a peaceful life in the

children (fig. 51.1), these goals were not

northern areas of Japan for many centuries

achieved. Instead, this statute, which contained

until the Yamato people (ancestors of most

the term "aborigines," connoting an uncultured,

modern-day Japanese) extended their power

uncivilized foreign race, deprived the Ainu

from the center of Honshu to the north,

people of basic human rights, not only in

inviting confrontations with the Ainu in many

educational and cultural spheres (such as

areas. The existence of the Ainu was threat¬

restrictions on the use of their own language

ened by the Yamato's abuse of power, mani¬

and customs) but also in terms of social and

fested in unfair trade practices and ecological

economic status. In an annual general meeting

disturbances like devastation of rivers—upon

in 1984, the Ainu Association of Hokkaido

which the Ainu depended for subsistence

passed a resolution calling for the Hokkaido

51/BEYOND SHINPO

369

51.2

The Ainu Rally in Sapporo

The year 1993 was designated as the

Former Aborigines Protection Act to be re¬

deals only with cultural aspects. Nonetheless,

scinded and replaced by a new law to recognize

in a country where high-ranking government

the rights of the Ainu people and strengthen

officials once claimed that Japan was an ethni¬

human-rights activities, promote culture, and

cally homogeneous country, passage of a law

of Hokkaido) organized a general rally

establish a fund to facilitate self-determination.

that acknowledges the existence of a different

to petition the Japanese government

The major purpose of the resolution for a new law

ethnic group was an epoch-making event. Even

for quick passage of the Ainu Shinpo in

was to make the government accountable for the

though the act may not admit "indigenousness"

Sapporo on August 23, 1993. Support¬

human rights of the indigenous population and to

in a strict legal sense, it states that the Ainu are

call for implementation of measures to achieve

an ethnic group and it seeks to realize a society

social and economic independence (fig. 51.2).

where the pride of the Ainu, as a people, is

International Year of the World's Indig¬
enous People by the United Nations.
Hokkaido Utari Kyokai (Ainu Association

ing the Ainu were other indigenous
people from Canada, the United
States, Sweden, and the Philippines
who had been participating in the Indig¬

In 1984 the Ainu Association of Fdokkaido

respected.

enous People’s Conference, held in

began working to draft a new law to protect

Nibutani, Hokkaido. The "Nibutani Fo¬

the rights of the Ainu, these efforts included

government organization was established

petitioning the governor of Fdokkaido and the

with financial assistance from the national

national government and appealing to the

and Fdokkaido governments that would

rum '93" was an important event for
the average Ainu person, who for the
first time learned how other indigenous

As a provision of this law, a new non¬

peoples were treated in their home

international community through a forum at

promote Ainu culture and research, although

countries and how important interna¬

the United Nations. As a result of the work

this is a good start, other issues still confront

tional communication was for the Ainu

by activists and after repeated discussions

the Ainu people. One of these concerns

movement. Although the Ainu were not

both in Fdokkaido and at the national level,

indigenous rights, or senjuken. In the legislative

the Ainu Shinpo (summarized as the 'Law on

process, even though the "indigenous nature,"

their governments and had legal stand¬

Promotion of Ainu Culture and Facilitation of

senjusei, of the Ainu people as traditional

ing, whereas the Japanese government

Popular Llnderstanding of Ainu Tradition")

occupants of northern Japan was established

had failed to acknowledge Ainu rights.

was enacted on May 8, 1997,- simultaneously,

as a historical fact, the language of the act

the Fdokkaido Former Aborigines Protection

uses the ambiguous term "indigenousiiess" and

Act was abolished.

specifically denies that this status accords

alone in their grievances, other indig¬
enous people had been recognized by

(AAH)

Through the legislative process, the final

territorial rights to the Ainu. Therefore, the

version of the law came to differ greatly from

next task will be to implement specific rights

the content that was initially envisioned, for it

that are due the Ainu as an indigenous popu¬
lation by participating in other related move¬
ments, such as the United Nations' discussion
on the declaration of indigenous rights. The
national government has begun moving in this
direction with establishment of a committee to
formulate a comprehensive human-rights
protection law that covers women, the handi¬
capped, the Ainu, and others.
There is an Ainu term, urespa mosir, which
means "the land where all things grow help¬
ing each other." On the eve of the millen¬
nium, a new world order is being sought.
This new era demands a partnership be¬
tween indigenous populations and
nonindigenous people, and together they
can contribute greatly to the international
community. Fulfilling the promise of the
future of mankind with hope is the wish of
the Ainu people.

.3 70

PRESENT AND FUTURE / J. SASAMURA

T

he Ainu language, ever since

52/Ainu
Language:
Present and Future
Hiroshi Nakagawa

52.1

Chitose dialect. Although today the Chitose

it has been studied, has been

region is considered to be the center of the

labeled by linguists a "dying

Ainu language-revitalization movement,

language.1' Kyosuke Kindaichi

serious study of the region's dialect began

wrote in his Study of the Ainu (1925), "It is

only in the late 1980s; prior to that time, few

common knowledge that the Ainu population

Ainu-Ianguage researchers knew that the area

will disappear completely from the earth within

had so many Ainu speakers.

the next two generations." Shiro Hattori

Over the past two decades, progress has

stated in the introduction to his Ainu Dialect

also been made in the study of other dialects,

Dictionary (1964): "In the autumn of 1954, I had

for instance, the dialect spoken in the Shizunai

an opportunity to meet with Seiichi Izumi,

region of the eastern part of Hidaka. This

assistant professor of the Anthropology

region is the site of the Shakushain memorial

Department of Tokyo University, to discuss

festival, the largest Ainu festival, and the area

the status of Ainu studies of the Association

is well known for preserving traditional

of Japanese Ethnology, which I had always

customs,- however, it wasn't until the 1970s

been interested in. I heard shocking news

that linguists started systematically recording

that the Ainu language would die out within

the dialect. In 1986 Kirsten Refsing, a Danish

Language Education in Nibutani,

May 1993

The Ainu were discouraged from
speaking the Ainu language after
1871 when the Colonization Commis¬
sion was established in Hokkaido. In
schools, Ainu children receive a
“Japanized" education, and the num¬
ber who learn the Ainu language in
their homes is fast approaching zero.
Shigeru Kayano, the cultural leader of
Nibutani, developed the first Ainulanguage classes, and his efforts
were joined by other Ainu communi¬
ties; now there are thirteen Ainu-language classes offered throughout
Hokkaido. As required by one of the
four main provisions of the Ainu
Shinpo of 1997, the Ainu language is
also taught in several colleges and
universities.

four to five years." Seventy-five years have

linguist who has produced compilations of

passed since the publication of Kindaichi's

Ainu language and folktale materials, pub¬

study and more than forty years since Hattori

lished The Ainu Language, the most comprehen¬

was astonished by Izumi's prediction, but the

sive book on Ainu grammar, based on this

Ainu language has not disappeared, although

dialect. Another example is the Samani dia¬

it is gravely endangered.
This essay concerns language-revitaliza¬

lect, spoken in the area east of Shizunai. Some
vocabularies of this dialect had been recorded

tion efforts currently being implemented in

in the 1950s, but it was not until the 1980s

southern Hokkaido. (Readers interested in

that the text was first recorded properly.

details about Ainu language, its dialects, and

Shiro Hattori, who had been so aston¬

relationships should read the essay by

ished at the prediction about the demise of

Tamura in this volume).

Ainu, wrote, "There will probably be less than

Recently, the author of this essay pub¬

twenty fluent speakers of the language even if

lished Ainu-Japanese Dictionary—Chitose Dialect

we look for them all over Hokkaido " His

(1995) and Express Ainu (1997b), a self-learn¬

dictionary, however, to which all the linguists

ing textbook for beginners based on the

at Tokyo University at the time contributed,

52/LANG U AGE SURVIVAL

374

did not include the Chitose, Shizunai, or

grant from the Hokkaido and national gov¬

Samani dialects,- at that time there must have

ernments, the Association initiated Ainu

been more than twenty fluent speakers in

language classes—lessons taught by the Ainu

either the Shizunai or Chitose region. In other

for the Ainu (fig. 52.1). The program began

words, it was not that there were no speakers

in Nibutani and slowly spread to other re¬

but that the speakers did not reveal themselves

gions. Today, there are fourteen such classes

to Hattori and his fellow linguists.

throughout Hokkaido.

The primary reason for this was that Ainu

In 1994 the Association published a

speakers did not use their language in public,

textbook for the class, Akor itak (Our lan¬

especially in the presence of Japanese, because

guage). This project marked a breakthrough,

of discrimination in matters ranging from

because Ainu representatives and several

marriage to jobs,- Ainu still face such obstacles

Japanese researchers worked together. The

today. Many Ainu speakers even today hide

fact that the Ainu themselves for the first time

their identity and their ability to speak the

presented their views on methods of expres¬

language, and the story is often told about

sion and discussed in editorial meetings the

parents who were fluent in Ainu but never spoke

standardization of the language was indeed

a word of it in front of their children. So, while

significant. Also in 1994, the Hokkaido Ainu

the researchers claimed that "no speakers re¬

Cultural Research Center, the first such

main" or "the language is fading away," the

research institution, was founded in Sapporo,

Date

Population

Source of Data

1854

17,810 (including Sakhalin)

New History of Hokkaido, 1969-81, Hokkaido

1873

16,272 (including Kurile Islands)

Ibid.

1898

17,573 (including Kurile Islands)

Ibid.

1913

18,543 (including Kurile Islands)

Ibid.

1936

16,519 (including Kurile Islands)

Ibid.

1972

18,298 (only Hokkaido)

Report of the 1972 Survey of Socio-Economic
Conditions of the Hokkaido Ainu, 1972,
Hokkaido Minseibu (Dept, of Public Welfare)

1979

24,180 (only Hokkaido)

Report of the 1979 Survey of Socio-Economic
Conditions of the Hokkaido Ainu, 1979,
Hokkaido Minseibu

1986

24,381 (only Hokkaido)

Report of the 1986 Survey of Socio-Economic
Conditions of the Hokkaido Ainu, 1986,
Hokkaido Minseibu

1993

23,830 (only Hokkaido)

Report of the 1993 Survey of Socio-Economic
Conditions of the Hokkaido Ainu, 1993,
Hokkaido Seikatsu Fukushibu

speakers were in fact present—if silent—but

where several Ainu researchers have been

were gradually disappearing.

studying their own culture.

Facing the disappearance of their lan¬

of the Ainu Shinpo raised the level of

Ainu language, such as Shigeru Kayano and

awareness of Ainu identity. Attendance at

Motoanrek Nabesawa, began searching

the 1987 United Nations Working Group

during the postwar period for a way to pre¬

on Indigenous Populations—a first for Ainu

serve and revive it using their own methods

people—and participation in various activi¬

and personal resources. They published

ties during the International Year of Indig¬

materials and cultural descriptions in Ainu and

enous Peoples in 1993 brought interna¬

taught Ainu language classes. Their efforts

tional recognition and assured the Ainu that

accelerated in the 1980s when the Hokkaido

they were not alone in the world.

Ainu Association became involved: with a

3 72

The activism that led to the adoption

guage, a few Ainu people with knowledge of

PRESENT AND FUTURE / H. NAKACAWA

With these developments, the environ-

More visible evidence of the resurgence
of Ainu language is the increase in the num¬
ber of people who are now learning the
language. In addition to the Ainu classes
mentioned previously, places where one can
study Ainu, such as universities and citizens'
groups, have also been on the rise. Some Ainulanguage homepages have also appeared on
the Internet. While most people who study
Ainu are primarily Japanese, a number of
young Ainu people whose native language is
Japanese have began participating in classes
or have created their own study groups for
Ainu language and culture. For example, in
Chitose, Ainu people in their twenties to
forties—the generations who had lost the
use of the Ainu language—performed a play
in Ainu. This group also holds study sessions
for the purpose of restoring knowledge of
traditional ceremonies.
52.2 Declining Use of Ainu Language

ment surrounding the Ainu language has been

in the Home

gradually changing, and Ainu speakers who

Until the mid-1900s Ainu language

previously had avoided speaking Ainu have

includes a major section about the Ainu

now begun to use the language. Toshiko

language, the law is far from what the Ainu

had a strong basis in the home, but
since then integrated schooling and

Although the Ainu Shinpo, enacted by
the Japanese government on May 7, 1997,

the breakdown of social and economic

Ueda, a well-known narrator of oral literature,

people originally envisioned because it

barriers between Ainu and Japanese

started speaking Ainu openly some ten years

addresses only cultural issues and not im¬

have nearly extinguished the use of

ago when her elder sister, also a famous

provement of social and economic status or

Ainu. Language-preservation efforts

narrator, passed away. While Ueda is today

land claims. For this reason, the law has been

fluent enough to converse in Ainu, she said

criticized by many people, including the

tance to maintaining instruction in the

that as a child she never communicated with

Ainu. The very small agency called the

native Ainu language as part of the

her parents or siblings in the language,- the

Institution for Promotion and Education of

official public school program. New

stories she narrates from memory are those

Ainu Culture and Research, established in

approaches have nevertheless

she learned from her sister only a year before

July 1997 following the enactment of the

she died. It must be that Ainu had been her

law, has been in trouble from the outset,

of Ainu are showing show interest in

native language as a child, but if so, she had

caught in conflicts with the Ainu people,

learning and using traditional lan¬

forgotten it after decades of speaking Japa¬

management, and scholars, and it thus faces

guage. (Hilger, NAA-T-1)

nese It is also possible that her sister's death

an uncertain future. The fact remains,

motivated Ueda to speak the language again.

however, that the government, for the first

II her sister had died twenty years ago instead

time in history, allocated funds to promote

of ten, she might have kept her sister's stories

Ainu culture. There is no doubt that with

hidden in her mind, having forgotten forever

the Ainu Shinpo, the movement to revive

that she was able to speak Ainu. This is just

the Ainu language has entered a new phase.

one of many similar stories. It is unclear how

No one can predict in what manner the

many potential Ainu speakers exist, but

language will survive, but it is clear that

history has shown that their number has

Ainu is not yet a "dead" language, though

frequently been underestimated (fig. 52.2).

certainly an endangered one.

have shifted to school classes and
special instructions, but there is resis¬

strengthened school language pro¬
grams, and today increasing numbers

52 / LANGUAGE SURVIVAL

373

I
Itaomachip:

Reviving a
Boat-Building and
Trading Tradition
Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka

N THE SUMMER OF 1989, A SUCCESSFUL

domain evaded the ban on foreign trade by

effort was made to reintroduce the lost

using the Ainu as middlemen,- they made a huge

art of Ainu boat-building as one element

profit reselling high-priced Chinese products.

of the reaffirmation of Ainu cultural

The goods obtained from the continent in the

identity following decades of decline under a

Ezo (Hokkaido) area were circulated into

government-imposed policy of assimilation.

Japanese society under descriptions such as "Ezo

The assimilation policy, which was enforced

brocade" or "Ezo treasure." This northern trade

by the Meiji government, in effect denied the

system was different from the officially ap¬

Ainu their independence, and the resulting

proved international trade that operated out of

social discrimination has created an image of

the southern entrepot in Dejima (Nagasaki), and

Ainu society as being more "primitive" than it

because it was conducted in secret, few docu¬

actually was. Researchers also have a unidi¬

ments describing its existence remain.

mensional and almost stereotyped image of

In 1809 the shogunate built the Shiranushi

the Ainu and have pursued studies largely

port in the southernmost part of Sakhalin. From

oriented toward "traditional" rather than

this base they monopolized trade with people in

modern Ainu culture. In this view, the Ainu

the lower reaches of the Amur River and else¬

were thought to be collectors of wild foods

where on the Asian continent. The Ainu were

and to have mainly fished for salmon and

then prohibited from traveling to the continent,

trout,- they have thus been arbitrarily classi¬

thus crippling their trading economy. The

fied as having a subsistence economy that

cessation of independent trade turned a well-

relied on gifts from nature.

maintained commodity structure and the

imm

53.1 Ainu Boats Sail Again
After more than two hundred years
when use of the traditional oceangoing
craft virtually ceased, a new but
smaller version of the fifty-foot

siss»§ilf*@

itaomachip was launched in Kushiro, in
August 1989. A launching ceremony
(chip-sanke) was performed by Ainu
elder Seijiro Yae-ekashi. This photo¬
graph shows the boat’s elegant shape
and balance as it moves through the
waves with wind in its sails. The boat
is now on display at the National Mu¬
seum of Ethnology in Osaka.

On the contrary; historical documents

supported it into a subsistence economy

seafarers (fig. 53.2). They built board-bound

based primarily on the procurement of foods

boats called itaomachip and shipped products to

from the wild. These forces effectively termi¬

and from the lower reaches of the Amur River

nated the progress the Ainu had been making

on the Asian continent. In addition to trading

over several centuries in developing into a

their own products such as furs and marine

politically organized society.

goods, they traded products obtained from the
Japanese (including pottery and iron pots) for

374

economically stratified Ainu society that

show that the early Ainu were traders and

In spring 1988 Tokuhei Akibe, an Ainu
man living in Kushiro (Hokkaido), visited the

luxury goods such as Chinese silk, metal

National Museum of Ethnology in Osaka to

handcrafts, and glass products. In Hokkaido,

ask for assistance in reviving the itaomachip

they made a profit selling these goods to Japa¬

boat-building tradition,- if we would help, he

nese merchants and the Matsumae domain in

promised to give the boat to the museum

the Hakodate region. Until recently, this image

collection. Late in autumn 1 heard from Akibe

of the Ainu as powerful traders has not been

that he had located a large katsura tree that

considered. Under the national isolation policy

was growing in the Furano Experimental

of the shogunate in the pre-Meiji era (before

Plantation of Tokyo LIniversity at the south¬

1868), Japanese merchants and the Matsumae

western foot of the Daisetsu Mountains in

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K

OHTSUKA

53.2 Early Maritime Vessel

Hokkaido. (Even in Hokkaido with its large

Hokkaido in attendance, a ceremony was held

This work by an unknown artist is the

forests, trees more than three feet in diameter

by the respected elder Hikawa: permission was

are found only on the experimental planta¬

sought from the god of the tree to cut it down,

Seven Ainu in yellow robes power the

tions.) Therefore, a major decision had to be

and prayers were offered for the success and

boat with oars and a woven-mat sail;

made about the relative value of a huge tree

safety of the work. Then the gigantic katsura

two men in kimono are Japanese. The

growing successfully versus the value derived

tree was cut down and carried to the shore of

inscription in Japanese reads, “pas¬

from Ainu people reviving the technology of

the Takkobu swamp in Kushiro, where con¬

itaomachip. Dr. Watanabe, an official at Furano

struction began. It took more than thirty days

Experimental Plantation, struggled with this

to shape the log canoe base that was the

oldest painting (ca. 1798) of an
oceangoing canoe (itaomachip).

sage to Kunashiri and iturup Island,"
two of the southern Kurile Islands.
The painting documents the use of
Ainu boats to transport Japanese offi¬

issue when Akibe brought it to his attention,

foundation of the boat. When hollowing out

cials and trading partners, but as com¬

and many meetings were needed to resolve it.

the interior of the canoe, the team experi¬

petition increased, the Ainu lost their

Akibe insisted that "the tree was more than

mented to ascertain whether the work-would

two hundred years old....Please consider this

be easier if the wood were charred (as is shown

tree as one once owned by the Ainu and give

in the Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood drawings).

competitive edge in trade between
Japan, Korea, and the Amur River re¬
gion, and their maritime tradition
faded away. Boat-building traditions

us permission." This plea had the desired

have been resurrected as commu¬

effect, and permission was eventually granted

ing of the sides of the canoe after it was dug

nity and museum projects, aided by

to take the tree.

out: water was poured into the canoe and

Ainu-e illustrating boats, (courtesy
of K. Ohtsuka)

The most difficult task was the widen¬

Three people participated in the cre¬

heated to boiling temperature with many hot

ation of the itaomachip: the leader, Tokuhei

stones, for the heat and water make the wood

Akibe, his brother, LItarian Narita, and his

more pliant and make it possible to spread the

brother-in-law, Takashi Yoshikawa. With

sides of the boat,- boards covered the cavity to

Tokuhei's almost superhuman organizational

maintain the high water temperature pro¬

skills and discipline, Utarian's sense of form

duced by the hot stones. (Similar techniques

and his technique as a woodcarver, and

are used by Northwest Coast Indians for

Yoshikawa's carpentry skills and faithful

spreading the sides of their log canoes.)

personality, it would be hard to find a more

Once the sides had been spread, holes

accomplished team to overcome the unknown

were drilled at fixed intervals down each side

challenges and technical problems associated

of the canoe, then sturdy broad planks were

with creating this traditional vessel. The team

cut and bound by rope through these holes

intended to use as a guide drawings of boat¬

to raise the sides of the craft. It was quite

making depicted in the Ainu-e drawings in

difficult to bind two or three planks edge-to-

Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood drawn by Shimanojo

edge tightly enough so that they would not

Murakami from the early nineteenth century.
In March 1989, with Ainu from all over

53/REVIVAL OF AINU

BOATS

leak,- fortunately, Yoshikawa, who had experi¬
ence with fishing boats, put his know-how as

3 75

53.3 Building an Itaomachip
One section of Illustrations of Ezo Live¬

lihood illustrates the process of build¬
ing an itaomachip and identifies many
features specific to it. The Ainu crafts¬
men who built a traditional boat in
1989 used this illustration as a guide.
The interior of a log was first burned
and then filled with water heated with
hot stones, allowing its sides to be
bent outward; a similar technique was
used by canoe-builders on the North¬
west Coast of North America.

a rope specialist to good use, and the planks

self-determination and folk rights. Because

were firmly bound. This process required 325

the 1989 conference was held in Japan, it was

feet (100 meters) of half-inch (twelve millime¬

historically significant for the Ainu, who took

ter) hemp rope and several pine boards sixteen

the lead in sponsoring it. The conference

inches wide and one-half inch (forty centime¬

representative from Polynesia proved to be a

ters by twelve centimeters) thick.

skilled boat captain and demonstrated some of

The various difficulties encountered in

the techniques Polynesians use to cross vast

the creation of the itaomachip were overcome,

ocean areas by canoe. Although only a short

and it was successfully launched with great

time was available to study these techniques,

ceremony on August 1 3, 1989, in Sapporo

we learned enough about the vessels handling

after a ceremony that ensured that the spirit

characteristics to confirm early accounts of

of the original tree would remain with the

Ainu ocean transport and trade.

boat. According to local custom, the boat was

accounts of early Ainu craftsmanship and

Utarian and Tokuhei aboard as rowers. The

seafaring abilities, also contributed to the

scene of the boat floating well-balanced on

modern Ainu sense of cultural identity, just as

the water was wonderful, and it moved swiftly

have similar projects undertaken by tribes of

when rowed,- even though it is forty-five feet

the northwest coast. Knowledge of and revival

(13.5 meters) long, it looked small out in the

of parts of one's history can be effective ways

middle of the lake, and it almost disappeared

to reestablish a sense of cultural identity. This

between the waves.

has been the lasting value of the itaomachip

The boat then traveled through Nibutani

376

This project, which reaffirmed historical

launched with a girl seated in the center, with

project, for it has provided the Ainu and the

in Piratori, Hidaka, and was displayed in Kushiro

museum's visitors with a new understanding

at the 1989 World Conference of Indigenous

about Ainu history: the stereotype of a people

Populations, an annual conference dedicated

surviving by hand-to-mouth subsistence is

to aborigine minority groups whose leaders

gone, replaced by the story of proud and

support international efforts to insure native

independent maritime traders.

PRESENT AND FUTURE / K. OHTSUKA

I

BELIEVE THAT FUTURE GENERATIONS OF

all areas of Piratori—is known as one of the

historians will consider the late twen¬

most famous Ainu kotan (a village in the Ainu

tieth century to be the beginning of a

language), and many of its people are quite

cultural renaissance for the Ainu people.

54/The Nibutani
Ainu Culture
Museum
Hidek.1 Yoneda

knowledgeable about Ainu traditions and

To both those involved in the Ainu movement

customs. For this reason, many Ainirresearch-

and the public at large, such a claim may seem

ers, including foreign scholars, have visited

an exaggeration,- however, as the 1997 Ainu

and studied in Nibutani.

Shinpo indicates, the movement to regain

The Nibutani Ainu Culture Information

rights for the Ainu population has made

Center was established in this small village by

unprecedented progress in the past few de¬

the Hokkaido Ainu Association in 1972. The

cades. While acknowledging the risk of

late Tadashi Kaizawa, the first director, and

oversimplification, I assert that the movement

Shigeru Kayano, the second director, made

has been and will continue to be a historic

pivotal contributions to this center. Tadashi

process characterized by drastic shifts in

Kaizawa, as deputy president of the Hokkaido

perception—from negative to positive, from

Ainu Association, was instrumental in estab¬

restraint to manifestation, from repression to

lishing the center and managed it during the

progress, from discrimination to respect, from

initial phase. Most of the folkcrafts exhibited

resignation to hope.

at the center were from the collection of

Museums and similar institutions in
various areas, with their staff and volunteers,
have played an important role in this develop¬

Shigeru Kayano: since the 1950s he has
collected Ainu culture materials and restored
them using his own money,- in addition to
collecting artifacts, he examined the records
of oral literature. In those days, talking about
Ainu culture and history was almost taboo
even in Nibutani, so there were few people
who understood or supported the activities of
Kaizawa and Kayano.
The Nibutani Ainu Culture Information
Center was moved from the Hokkaido Ainu
Association to Piratori in 1977. In 1991 the
town constructed a new building and named
it the Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum. Mean¬
while, Kayano created a new private museum
in the old building to exhibit, in addition to
Ainu folkcrafts, artifacts of a variety of indig¬
enous peoples from around the world. This
facility was named the Shigeai Kayano

er -

Nibutani Ainu Information Center. On April 25,
1992, both institutions held opening ceremo¬
nies, and Nibutani became the site of two
museums, one public and the other private.
54.1 Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

ment. The Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

The Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum in

(fig. 54.1) and its predecessor, the Nibutani

in 1996 on the Saru River, which flows

Ainu Culture Information Center, is one

through the Nibutani area, has been a contro¬

institution that has made significant contribu¬

versial government project, opposed by many

Piratori opened to the public in April

A large-scale dam that was constructed

1992. Although Piratori’s population
is only 7,000, the museum attracts
30,000 visitors annually, from all over

tions to the cultural movement of the Ainu

local people. Because the museum was con¬

Japan and abroad. The museum was

people. Its influence extends beyond Piratori

structed as a means of appeasing the opposi¬

funded by the government to assuage
opposition to a controversial dam on
the Saru River at Nibutani, home of
the greatest concentration of Ainu in
Flokkaido.

(the larger town district of which Nibutani is

tion to the dam project, some people avoid

a part) where the museum was established and

involvement with it, but to focus solely on

reorganized by the town authority. Piratori,

this fact leads to a misunderstanding of the

located at the western foot of the Hidaka

history of the controversy and overlooks

Mountains that extend southeast from central

issues of greater importance.

Hokkaido, has a population of slightly less

Without the long-term efforts of people

than 7,000. Nibutani is one district of Piratori,

committed to preserving Ainupuri (Ainu

and some 70 percent of its residents are said

customs and tradition), no achievements

to be of Ainu lineage. Nibutani—and perhaps

would have been made. The fact that

54/ NIBUTANI

MUSEUM

377

Nibutani is regarded today as a key base for

and search for opportunities to preserve

the Ainu cultural movement is the result of the

tradition (fig. 54.2). Whether this can be

will and hard work of individuals such as

achieved will depend on how large the circle

Kaisawa and Kayano, who were deeply com¬

of involved people will become and how

mitted to the cause—other elements became

strong their resolve will be.

less important. Educating people who are

Ainu activities in urban areas will add

willing and able to preserve their cultural

momentum to the renaissance movement, and

tradition, especially young people, is an urgent

there are signs that this is already happening.

task, for it will become the basis for future

It must be remembered, however, that Ainu

advancement. It is essential to increase the

tradition has its roots in a hunting, fishing,

number of such people and to teach them how

and gathering lifestyle and is nonagricultural/

to deal with fundamental issues as well as how

nonurban in nature,- the contradiction will

to implement specific measures geared toward

successfully coexist as long as people do not

research and the preservation of Ainu culture.

forget their roots and continue to establish

The basic philosophy of the museum is

new traditions. As we enter the twenty-first

to "promote traditional culture into the con¬

century, the importance of museums located

temporary Ainu culture of today" in other

in areas of indigenous cultures will no doubt

words, it must be an ongoing comprehensive

increase, and with this increased importance

project to examine the past, understand the

comes the responsibility to continue to

current political and cultural environment,

improve as an information resource.

54.2 Ainu Culture Exhibitions
The specimens in the Nibutani Ainu
Culture Museum reflect traditional life
and customs of the Ainu of the Saru
River region in the district of Hidaka,
Hokkaido. Most of the museum’s col¬
lections were donated by the Ainu cul¬
tural leader Shigeru Kayano. The mu¬
seum also displays contemporary Ainu
artists’ work.

378

PRESENT AND FUTURE /HYONEDA

I

WAS BORN IN 1947 INTO A FISHERMAN'S

was also working at the tourist area (fig. 55.4).

household facing the Pacific, and 1 lived

The time ! spent with her had a significant

in that house until I graduated from

impact on my life, for I was able to learn, for

junior high school. While I was raised in

The Heart
Fucbi

Conveyed
Tomoko Keira

women think,- I learned to reach the Ainu

be touched by Ainu customs and language,- I

heart and was filled with contentment.

only knew my grandmother on my father's

activism of various indigenous/minority

picture of her and an old kimono of hers that

populations around the world, the campaign

! had been given. Before the days of my

for Ainu liberation grew. It was, at the same

grandparents, older Ainu people in my town

time, a movement to revitalize and protect

apparently observed ethnic customs, but by

Ainu culture, which was fading away. 1 joined

the time my parents were born we were

the movement,- at the same time, 1 got married

already in the last stage of japan's assimilation

and began raising my children. I met older Ainu

policy—becoming completely Japanese and

people in different regions and had many

forgetting Ainu traits was thought to be the

opportunities to work with them for the cause,

best path. Therefore, my parents were taught

and 1 was lucky enough to inherit their wisdom.

55.2

55.1 Tomoko Keira Listening to a

neither the Ainu language nor Ainu customs,

Story from Suteno-fi/chj

and even though 1 had some Ainu blood, it

Shizunai, Hokkaido, was raised solely
in the Ainu language until her early

In the 1970s, inspired by the growing

side—an Ainu woman—through a small

55.1

Suteno Orita (1899-1993), born in

the first time, how Ainu feel and how Ainu

an Ainu family, I rarely had an opportunity to

took me a long time to consider myself Ainu.
It was only after I moved to the city for

One day Haru-fucbi passed away. The
death of someone who had become so close
to me, who taught me how to feel Ainu, was
shocking. More than a mentor, I felt I had lost

twenties. She contributed her exten¬

a job that I began wondering "What is Ainu?,"

sive knowledge of Ainu culture to vari¬

and I became interested in learning all 1 could.

involved in conferences both at home and

ous fields such as yukar (Ainu epics)

1 was surprised—and angry—about how little

abroad with indigenous people of many

and traditional cooking. In a book that

the people around me knew about the Ainu,

countries, 1 was searching for the life I should

and how deep their prejudices were.

live as an Ainu. My search led to my decision

Tomoko Keira wrote in 1995 to com¬
memorate Suteno-fuchi, Keira de¬
scribes her as a great teacher who
was a role model for all Ainu women.

55.2 SUTENO-FUCH/ HOLDING TUKI
In addition to her skillful rendition of

I was twenty years old when I decided to

someone I could rely on. Although 1 was

to move in with Suteno-fucbi (figs. 55.1, 55.2),

do what I could to add to public understand¬

who was then in her eighties and alone,- I had

ing about the Ainu, and I went back home to

been introduced to her by Haru-fucbi.

work at Ainu tourist areas. 1 worked as a

In the spring of 1991, I looked forward

traditional dancer for two years at a tourist

to a relaxed life, for I was now relieved of my

location, but my hope that this would educate

family and work obligations because my two

traditional Ainu cooking and wrote the

the public about Ainu culture did not come

children were grown and my husband sup¬

first cookbook (1992) that codified

true. However, I met Haru-fuchi (fucbi is the

ported my decision. As soon as 1 put down my

many traditional recipes.

Ainu term for "respected female elder"), who

luggage, however, fuchi handed me the inner

Ainu yukar and practice of traditional
crafts, Suteno -fuchi also promoted

55/ FUCHI WISDOM

3 79

bark of the linden tree (nipes) and began to

of different ethnicity. When I left my home¬

teach me to twine bags and baskets, saying,

town, I saw myself as different from others for

"You should learn this now and you will find it

the first time, and I asked myself, "Who am I?"

useful in the future." We then started to weave

It was the various fucbi who made me feel

a carrying strap (tar) and moved on to making

Ainu and helpes me to understand Ainu

Sculpture by Her Son

bags (saranip) with the thread we made. Later

women. The short period of time 1 shared
with the fucbi, who are gone now, created a

55.3 Peramonkoro Sunazawa with a

Peramonkoro Sunazawa (1897-1971)

we brought in cattails from a marsh and began

was one of the few Ainu women of her

weaving mats. Without realizing it, I was

special and unique core in my heart, and it

generation to graduate from high

experiencing that part of an Ainu woman's

was Sutcno-fucbi who implanted that core

existence that is described as "thinking while

throughout my being. I feel that I am here to

moving your hands." I was surprised that 1 neither

digest what fucbi told me, make it my own,

compositions she influenced the artis¬

questioned nor resisted the situation. The

and in turn convey her words to my children

tic development of her son, artist Bikky

simple, gentle old woman was a great teacher.

and grandchildren.

school. She became a master of tradi¬
tional Ainu design and embroidery, and
by sharing her knowledge and fabric

Sunazawa. In addition to her contribu¬
tions to the field of Ainu textiles, which

I learned so much by doing women's

Going home after a year of living with

seasonal work with her. She told me many

Suteno-fucbi, together with my husband and

have been recognized by scholars, she

stories during our breaks from manual or field

friends I formed a new organization to revive

senting yukar and keeping alive the oral

work and at meals,- she told me what she

and convey the traditional culture of the Ainu

tradition of Ainu epic poetry.

believed in and valued, what she inherited

in contemporary everyday life. Since 1992,

was admired for her prowess in pre¬

the number of programs to
spread traditional Ainu skills
and spirit through workshops
and seasonal field activities
has increased, and there has
been a steady growth in the
number of participants—one
noteworthy tradition that was
revived after 1 30 years was
the Ainu way of hunting deer.
Among Suteno-fucbi's
words, those that have made
me the strongest impressions
on me were these: "Because I
am teaching you right, you
should be careful not to
teach others wrong when it's
your turn",- "Try hard",- and
"Work your best, and when
working is done, the god of
paradise will come to take
you." She completed her
work in 1993 and began her
journey, as she herself said,
55.3

55.4

55.4 Haru Torao, 1903-1991

from ancestors, and what she was told by

Haru-fuchi was born in Shizunai, Hok¬

respected male elders, the ekashi. As she mixed

In 1995 I participated in the World

kaido. When she began attending el¬

her own experience with old tales, she always

Woman's Conference in Beijing. Despite the

told me to fulfill my responsibilities and work

conference slogan, The Twenty-first Century:

to the world where her

ementary school at the age of nine,

ancestors waited for her.

she was bullied by Japanese children,

as an Ainu woman in a fun manner. I never

The Century of Human Rights," the disparities

she was severely injured by a stone,

had the feeling that I was being taught, nor

between the conditions of the indigenous/

she stopped going to school. Although

did fucbi mean to teach or lecture,- rather, she

minority people of the world, including the Ainu,

the conspicuous tattoo around her

shared with me her stories and her memories.

and the majority population sometimes seem a

Something, unexplainable through words or

chasm yet to be bridged. While the struggle to

logic, took hold in my mind.

rectify economic and social inequality continues,

who often threw stones at her. After

mouth made her a target of discrimina¬
tion, she was proud of her culture and
tried to teach Ainu values to young Ainu
people until she died. She was a gener¬

When I was young, 1 was neither con¬

there is a long way to go and the tasks are enor¬

ous and understanding person who

scious of being born Ainu nor did 1 under¬

mous. Spiritualism alone will not open a door, but

was greatly respected.

stand the meaning of my existence as a person

if that spirit is lost, there is no future.

380

PRESENT AND FUTURE /T.KEIRA

At the Beijing conference, I presented
these words of Sunazawa-/t<cfoi (then sixtyseven years old), which she had spoken at
the Ainu Culture Conference held in 1964.
Although our ancestors did not have an
alphabet, the education which families
provided was solid. I will tell you about
this in the Ainu language:
Tane anakne shisam-utar kotankorine
Now the Japanese behave as if our towns
were theirs
Fuchi iyaiikakka
They make the fuchi prof oundly sad
Ekashi iyaiikakka
They make the ekashi profoundly sad
Chi-oira ine
We forget the good customs of the Ainu
Shisam puri patek chi-ki-wa okai
And we learn only the bad Japanese
customs
Ekashi-ki-ya yukar hene
We try to follow the yukar that the ekashi
performed,
Upopo hene
the songs and dances,
Fuchi utar yaisama hene
and the fuchi's impromptu poems,Opitta-wa oira isam
We have forgotten all of them
Whenever I think about these words, 1
cry in my heart. Looking at so many
people gathered on this occasion, I do
not know how to express my pleasure,
except with tears (nuke turano), feeling the
joy fuchi and ekashi would have felt.
My fellow Ainu people, the pillar of the
Ainu family is woman. 1 would like to ask
you to educate our grandchildren and
children about the enormous power of the
woman so that they will grow up with
55.5 Into the Future

pride about being born Ainu. I would like

The experience of growing up Ainu is chang¬
ing. Much of what made people “Ainu" in

to ask you to join me, hand in hand, and
let's follow the manners of ekashi and fuchi

the past no longer exists, yet despite

so that we won't forget our ekashi's language

changes in Ainu perceptions of their own

and yukar and the pride of being Ainu

ethnicity and uncertain relations with the

Please, my fellow Ainu people, 1 sincerely

world around them, Ainu still find strength

ask you to do me this favor.

in their shared past and their unique art,

Nube turano ku-haw tapanna. lyairaikere.

traditions, beliefs, and personal experi¬
ences. Although their bridge to the future is

[With tears, this is what I tell you. Thank

unsteady due to unresolved civil rights is¬

you veiy much.]

sues and the absence of legal support for
their self-determination as an indigenous
people, increased public recognition and
support both in Japan and abroad have
made many Ainu people today more confi¬
dent in their future than they have been for
the past hundred years. (Hilger, NAA-1-19)

55 / F U C H I WISDOM

381

Checklist of

AMNH: American Museum of Natural
History (New York)

70/4094 Saranip Basket
Fig. 44.4, p. 31 I
B. Dean, col. 1900, Piratori, Hokkaido

70-0002A/B Knife and Sheath

Artifacts Illustrated

Fig. 42.8, p 293

in this Volume

A: L20.3, W2.5, H1 3,- B: Ll 8.5, W5, H2.2

Smith, col. 1904, St. Louis

wood, metal, bark, bone, cloth

L27, W22, Hi 1, grass, elm-bark fiber

70/4156 Inaw- ( Carving Tool
Fig. 26.2, p. 193
B. Dean, col. 1900, Shiraoi, Hokkaido
Ll5.1, W5.8, H1.3, wood, iron

(Measurements in centimeters: L — length,

70/1 I Choker

W — width, H — height, D — diameter)

Fig. 45.23, p. 322

70/4189 Ikupasuy

A. C. James, col. 1896, Hokkaido

Fig. 22.4, p 171

L38, W1 3.5, H 1.5, cotton cloth, glass and lead beads,
steel, brass

70/1 4 Shaman Belt
Fig. 37.6, p. 265
A. C. James, col. 1896-98, Sakhalin
Belt: L57, Wl 3, Hi, Knife case: L17.5, W4.5, Hi.3
Sealskin, brass, wood

70/1 5 Tobacco Pouch
Fig. 22.7, p. 174
A. C. James, col. ca. 1896-98, Sakhalin
L34, Wl5, Hi ,5; sealskin, glass beads, cotton,
string, fur, pigment

B. Dean, col. 1901, Abuta, Hokkaido
L36.5, W3.5, H 1.5, wood

70/4192 Ikupasuy
Fig. 22.4, p. 171
B Dean, col. 1901, Usu, Hokkaido
L36.5, W3.6, H2, wood

70/2932 Saranip Basket
Figs 1.15, p 16, 43.2, p. 302
Norbeck, col. 1951, Penkatori, Hokkaido
L28, W23, H6, elm-bark fiber

70/2955 Ikupasuy
70/23 Ikupasuy

Fig. 22.4, p, 171

Fig. 22.5, p. 170

Norbeck, col. 1951, Niokonson, Hokkaido

A. C. James, col. 1896-98, Hokkaido

L32.3, W2.4, H1.4; wood

L32.5, W4, H1.5, wood
70/34895 Anush Apron
70/71 B Toggling Harpoon
Fig. 29.12, p. 214
A. C. James, col. 1896-98, Hokkaido

Fig, 45.24, p. 323
J. Bird, col. 1983
L56, W46; elm bark, cotton cloth, thread

L20, W5.5, H5, iron, bone, cloth, wood, sinew

70/966 Retarpe Robe

ACM: Asahikawa City Museum

Figs. 22.6a, p. 172,- 42.4, p. 290

12.3.1.1 Carved Bear

B. Laufer, col 1899, Sakhalin

Fig. 47.6, p. 337

L120; nettle fiber, cotton, thread, embroidery, applique

By Umetaro Matsui, 1920s
L36, W35, H25, wood

70/1 256 Six-String Tonkori
Fig. 41.6, p 284

4439 Bear Fetish

B Laufer, col. 1900, Sakhalin

Fig. 38.14, p. 273

L129, W24.5, H5.5, wood, cloth, wire, hide,
pigment, cord

Sakhalin

70/1263 Strike-a-Light Kit
Fig. 22.9, p. 175
B. Laufer, col. 1899, Sakhalin
L20.8, W7.2, I 13i sturgeon skin, metal, bone,
quartz, wood

70/1 739 Crescent Carving
Fig. 22.3, p. 170
B. Laufer, col. 1899, Sakhalin
Ll 3.4, Wl .5, Hi .5, bone

70/3998 Carved Pipe
Fig. 22.8, p. 174
B. Dean, col. 1900, Shiraoi, Hokkaido
L27.4, W2, H2, wood

70/4040A, B Beaded Earrings

382

LlO.9, W4.2, H6.8, wood

4436 Carved Bear
Fig. 47.5, p. 337
Sakhalin
Ll2, W2.6, H4.1, wood

4449 Bear Fetish
Fig. 47.4, p. 337
Sakhalin
L1 1.9, W4.2, H6.2; wood

4506 Bear Carving
Fig. 11.2, p. 92
Col. ca. 1920s
L15, W7.5, H7.5, wood

BMA: Brooklyn Museum of Art

Fig. 45.30, p. 325

X2001.26 Beaded Necklace

B. Dean, col. 1901, Shikiu, Hokkaido

Fig. 45.27, p. 324

A: L8.3, W5.2, H1 7; B: L8.5, W5.5, Hi.7
Brass, glass beads

Class beads

CHECKLIST

S. Culin, col. 1912, Sakhalin

12.447 Beaded Necklace

1 2.250 Ikupasuy

12.3 32 Ikupasuy

Fig. 20.6, p. 158

Fig. 18.8 (right), p. 143

Fig. 35.9 (left), p. 252

F. Starr, col. 1904

F. Starr, col. 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido

F. Starr, col. 1910, prob. Saru River, Hokkaido

Class beads

L33.6, wood

L32.2; wood

1 2.1 59 Toy Mortar

1 2.282 Ikupasuy

Fig. 34 4, p. 246

Fig. 46.15, p. 333

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido

F. Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido

H6.4, wood

L39.7, wood

1 2.1 60 Chopstick Case

12.297 Ikupasuy

Fig. 47.1, p. 335

Fig. 30.4 (left), p. 224

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido

J. Batchelor, col. before 1912, prob. Saru River, Hokkaido

L. 30.1, wood

L34.1, wood

12.353 Ovoid Platter
Fig. 28.8, p. 204
S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido
L26.4, wood

1 2.389B Quiver with Hunting Bag and Arrows
Fig. 29.20, p. 217
F. Starr, col. 1904, Okotsonai, Hokkaido
L52.9,- wood, cherry bark, bearskin, feathers

! 2.1 67 Mouth Harp (mukkuri)

I 2.298 Ikupasuy

Fig. 41.2, p. 283

Fig. 30.4 (second from right), p 224

12.495 Salmon-Skin Stretcher

S. Culm, col 1912, Northern Japan

F. Starr, col 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido

Fig. 19.6A, p 151

L37.2, wood

F. Starr, col. 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido

Bamboo

L76.7; wood, salmon skin, sinew
I 2.1 73 Cigarette Holder
Fig. 47.1, p. 335
F. Starr, col 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido
Ll 1.9, wood

1 2.302 Ikupasuy
Fig. 46.16 (right), p. 333

I 2.582 Ainu Robe

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido

Fig. 18.9, p. 144

L33.2, wood

F. Starr, col. 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido
Cotton, silk, thread, embroidery, applique

1 2.! 75 Rosette Mold
Fig. 45.25, p. 323
S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido
Ll 1.6,- wood

12.307 Ikupasuy
Fig. 35.9 (second from left), p. 252
F Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido
L29.2, wood

J. Batchelor, col before 1912, prob. Saru River,
Hokkaido
! 2.309 Ikupasuy

12.177 Toy Knife
Fig. 34.4, p. 246
J. Batchelor, col. before 1912, prob. Saru River,
Hokkaido

F. Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido
L32.8, wood

F. Starr, col. 1904, Okotsonai, Hokkaido

Fig 18 8 (left), p 143

J. Batchelor, col. before 1912, prob. Saru River,
Hokkaido

L17 2, katsura wood

L.35.4, wood
12.597 Fish Spear (marek)
12.316 Ikupasuy

Fig. 34.4, p. 246

J Batchelor, col before 1912, prob. Saru River,
Hokkaido

F. Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido

Ll0.9; mussel shell

12.20! Winnower Scoop Model

12.588 Fish-Roe Masher
Fig. 28.5, p 204

12.315 Ikupasuy
12.181 Grain-Stripper {pipes)

1-8.1, W5; wood, salmon or frog bladder, sinew

Fig. 46.16 (left), p. 333

Wood

Fig. 28.2, p. 203

I2.583A Deer Call
Fig. 29.3, p. 209

Fig. 35.9 (second from right), p 252
S. Culin, col 1912, Hokkaido

Fig. 29.11, p. 213
F. Starr, col 1904, Piratori, Hokkaido
L44.7, wood, iron

L34.2, wood
12.661 Tobacco Box
12.317 Ikupasuy

Fig. 1.21, p. 19

Fig. 44.2, p 310

F. Starr, col. 1904, Okotsonai, Hokkaido

1 2.229 Ikupasuy

F. Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido

Wood, ivory

Fig. I 3.5, p 105

L35.3, wood, lacquer

Ll 1.2, wood

1 2.674A Pillow Box

F Starr, col. 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido
L3 3 1, wood

12.323 Ikupasuy

Fig 32.7, p 237

Fig. 18.8 (second from right), p 143

S. Culin, col 1912, prob. Saru River, Hokkaido

12.245 Ikupasuy

F. Starr, col 1910, Piratori, Hokkaido

L32.9, wood

Fig. 20.7, p 159

L32.5,- wood

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido
L33.6, wood

12.678 Spatula
12.325 Ikupasuy
Fig. 35.9 (right), p. 252

12.247 Ikupasuy
Fig. 30.4 (second from left), p. 224

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido

1 2.326 Ikupasuy
Fig. 30.4 (right), p. 224

1 2.248 Ikupasuy
Fig. 46.16 (center), p. 333
F. Starr, col. 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido
L32 1, wood

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido
L58.3; wood

L31.9, wood

F. Starr, col 1904, Okotsonai, Hokkaido
L29.9, wood

Fig. 42.17, p. 298

J. Batchelor, col. before 1912, prob. Saru River, Hokkaido
L32.9; wood

12.690 Woman's Robe (retarpe)
Fig. 20.8, p 160
J. Batchelor, col. before 1912
Nettle-plant fiber, cotton, thread, embroidery, applique

12.33! Ikupasuy

12.789 Thimble and Needlecase

Fig. 18.8 (second from left), p 143

Fig. 45.21, p. 321

F. Starr, col 1904, Porusaru, Hokkaido

S. Culin, col. 1912, Hokkaido

L31.4; wood

L8.5; wood

CHECKLIST
383

BMS: Buffalo Museum of Science
Cl 2988 Ikupasuy
Fig. 26.6 (lower), p. 196

C1 8764 Ikupasuy

88075 Quiver and Arrows

Fig. 26.5 (top), p. 195

Fig. 32.2, p. 234

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954

Collector unknown, "Yezo, Japan"

L28, W2.2; wood

L54.4; Wl 3, 1 18,- wood, cherry bark, birchbark, bearskin

G. Umlauff, col. 1939, Kurile Islands
L33.5, W2.5, H2; wood

Cl 3461 Cooking Spatula

Cl 8766 Necklace with Flowered Medallion

I 3 I 696.1—2 Mountain Knife and Sheath

Fig. 10.5, p. 90

Fig. 29.21, p. 217

B. Sharrow, col 1940s or early 1950s, Hidaka (?),

Collector and location unknown

Fig. 28.6, p. 204

Hokkaido

L45, W4.5, I 14; steel, wood, cherry bark

S. Sugiyama (?), col. 1939, Hokkaido

Glass beads, brass

Displayed at Golden Gate Expos.

234945 Embroidered Headband

L51.25, wood

Cl 8767 Hoop Earrings

Fig. 45.22, p. 322

Fig. 45.31, p. 325

Collector and location unknown

Cl 3462 Cooking Spatula

B. Sharrow, acc. 1951, Hidaka, Hokkaido

Fig. 28.7, p. 204

D8.1, brass, glass beads

L175, W15; cotton cloth, silk thread

S. Sugiyama (?), col. 1939, Hokkaido
Displayed at Golden Gate Expos.

Cl 8770 Ikupasuy

L50; wood

Fig. 26.5 (second from top), p.

Cl 3464 Platter

195

Takeki Fujito

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954

Llncatalogued: Eagle Sculpture,

L33, W3, wood

Fig. 47.1 1, p. 340

1978

By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido

Fig. 42.16, p. 298
S. Sugiyama (?), col. 1940, Hokkaido (?)

Cl 8783A, B Sword and Hanger

L28.1, W29.3,- wood

Fig. 12.2, p. 97
B. Sharrow, acc.

Cl 3466 Ikupasuy

1951, Hidaka (?), Hokkaido

Blade: 1.42.5; Scabbard: L51, Hilt: D35.5, wood, steel,

Fig. 26.6 (upper), p. 196
Collector and location unknown,

1940

H36, W22, D30.5, walnut wood

Llncatalogued: Life-Sized Wooden Figures,

1991-93

Fig. 47.12, p. 340

linden-bark fiber or celastrus-plant fiber, cotton thread,

By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido

cotton cloth

Walnut wood

Wood

Cl 8799 Lacquerware Box

Uncatalogued: Sea Otter Sculpture,

Fig. 12.5, p. 100

Fig. 1.30, p. 24

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954

By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido

H43.2, D35.5; wood, paint, lacquer

L45.5, W31, D21, wood

David and Chisato Dubreuil

Fig. 30.7, p. 226

Fig. 28.10 (right), p. 206

Collection

By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido

S. Sugiyama (?), acc. 1940, Kurile Islands

Llncatalogued: Totem Pole Miniature

CI 3 4 6 7 Ikupasuy

Fig. 26.5 (bottom), p. 195
Collector and location unknown, 1940

1993

L35.5, wood
Uncatalogued: Whale Sculpture,
CI 3474 Spoon

L31.2, wood

1993

H29, W60, D28.5, wood

Fig. 47.7 (left), p. 338
By Koyama, col. 1986, Akan, Hokkaido

Cl 3475 Spoon

HACRIG Hokkaido Archaelogical and

H36, W4.5, wood, paint

Fig. 28.10 (left), p. 206
S. Sugiyama (?), acc.

Cultural Remains Investigation Center,

1940, Kurile Islands

Llncatalogued: Totem Pole Miniature

L23, wood

Fig. 47.8 (right), p 338

Cl 4724A Ikupasuy

H3 1.5, W5.3-5.7, wood, paint

Unknown artist, col Sapporo, Hokkaido

Uncatalogued: Iyomante

L35.5; wood

41

L6.4, W4, D3.1, ceramic

Fig. 16.6, p. 127
By Shunri Chishima, ca.

Cl 8752,

Killer Whale Effigy (replica), Middle Jomon
Fig. 3.5, p

Kikyo-2 site, Hakodate, Hokkaido

Fig. 26.5 (second from bottom), p 195
Around Sea of Okhotsk

Sapporo, Hokkaido

1790-1820

18755 Sake Cups

HMH: The Historical Museum

Figs. 8.5, p. 77; 46.3, p 328

of Hokkaido

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954
H6.3, D12; wood, paint, lacquer

FMC: Field Museum of Natural History

Ceramic Figurine (replica), Final Jomon

(Chicago)

Fig. 3.8, p. 42

32075 Tobacco Pouch

Motowanishi site, Muroran, Hokkaido

Figs. 8.5, p. 77; 46.3, p. 328

Fig. 33.8, p. 244

L6.7, W5, D3.5,- ceramic

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954

A. Pogosky, col. before 1893, Sakhalin

H9.5, D14, wood, paint, lacquer

Ll 1, W17.5, sea-lion skin, cotton, thread

Cl 8756,

1 8757 Sake Saucer Stands

Duck-Shaped Figurine (replica), Final Jomon
Japanese National Important Cultural Property

Cl 8759 Lacquerware Container

32I04A, B Salmon-skin Boots

Fig. 3.1, p. 39

Fig. 12.4, p. 99

Fig. 29.24, p. 220

Bibi-4 site, Chitose, Hokkaido

B. Sharrow, acc. 1951, Hidaka, Hokkaido

A Pogoski, col. before 1893, Sakhalin

L3 1.7, W17, D9; ceramic

L22, wood, lacquer

H48, L27, W16; seal and sea-otter hide, cotton, thread

C1 8 76 I Ikupasuy

88019 Choker with Rosette Medals

Japanese National Important Cultural Property

Ceramic Mask (replica), Final Jomon

Fig. 45.26, p. 323

Fig. 3.6, p. 42

B. Sharrow, acc. 1954

Collector unknown, Hakodate, Hokkaido

Mamachi site, col 1986, Chitose, Hokkaido

L29.2, W2.5; wood

L40.5, W7,- velvet, pewter

L17.9, Wl8.2, D6, ceramic

384

CHECKLIST

Fig. 26.5 (third from top), p.

195

1987

Bone Spoons (replicas), Epi-Jomon

Needlecase with Geometric Engraving

Uncatalogued: Kani (Crab),

Figs. 3.15a, B, p. 45

(replica), Okhotsk

Fig. 47.26, p. 348

Esan site, Hokkaido

Fig. 4.9, p. 50

By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

A: 1—15; B: L7; antler, bone

Kafukai-A site, Rcbun, Hokkaido

L47, W38,- lauan wood, oil stain, pigment

L.I2, Wl.4, DO.7, birdbone
Bone Spoon (replica), Epi-Jomon

Llncatalogued: Necklace,

Fig. 3.16, p. 45

Fig. 47.14, p. 341

Usu-10 site, Hokkaido

L27.3, W4.5, D4.3; antler

By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

HAMA: Hokkaido Asahikawa

L30.6, Wl 1, Japanese spindle-tree wood,

Museum of Art

oil stain, pigment

Sea Otter Figurine (replica), Okhotsk

Nitne-kamuy (Evil God),

Fig. 3.18, p. 46

Fig. 47.27, p. 348

Tokoro Fort, Hokkaido

By Bikky Sunazawa, Asahikawa, Hokkaido

L6.2, W2.3, Dl.7, ivory

1968

1988
Llncatalogued: Gozen sanji no gangu
(Foys at 3:00 A.M.),

Hi22, W26, D48, katsura wood, Manchurian ash, walnut

1987

Fig. 47.22, p 345
By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

L41.7, W22, DlO.2, wood

Bronze Belt Ornaments (replicas), Okhotsk
Fig. 4.8, p. 51
Menashitomari, Hokkaido

HPGBE: Hokkaido Prefectural

L5.5, W5.6, bronze
Government Board of Education

SM: Shin Mouri Collection

Toggling Harpoon Head (replica), Epi-Jomon

(Sapporo)

Llncatalogued: Japanese Clogs

Fig. 3.13, p. 44

Owl Eyes (fragment), Final Jomon

Fig. 1 1.4, p. 94

Esan site, Hokkaido

Fig. 3.7, p. 42

Soshichiro Mouri, col. 1909-29, Hokkaido

L12.7, W 1.9, DO.9; bone, agate blade

Bibi-4 site, Chitose, Hokkaido

L22.8, W9.4, H7.2, wood, cow leather

LlO, WlO; earthenware
Fishhook (replica), Epi-Jomon

Uncatalogued: Poison-Preparation Bowl with Point

Fig. 3.12, p. 44

Fig. 29.18, p. 216

Esan site, Hokkaido

Soshichiro Mouri, col.

L7.5, W5.2, DO.7, bone

Noriko Kawamura Collection

1909-29, Hokkaido

Bowl: L24.3, W5.7, H2, Point: L6.4, WI

Uncatalogued: Ryo (Force or Spirit), 1989
Harpoon Head (replica), Okhotsk

Fig. 47.29, p. 349

Fig. 3.14, p. 44

By Noriko Kawamura, Otaru, Hokkaido

Llncataloged: Needlecase

Kafukai-A site, ReBun, Hokkaido

L200, W300, textile

Fig. 42.21, p. 300

Ll 1.4, W2, DO.7, bone

Soshichiro Mouri, col.
Uncatalogued: Hokkaido no sbiki: Aki mon’yo

Wide-Mouth Vessel, Okhotsk

(Four Seasons in Hokkaido: Autumn),

Fig. 3.17, p. 44

Fig. 47.30, p. 350

1 990

By Noriko Kawamura, Otam Junior College, Sapporo,

L30.4, W26.6, Dl 1.3, earthenware

Textile

Fig. 3.9, p 42
Kashiwagi-B site, Eniwa, Hokkaido

L35.7, W3.3, igneous rock

1909-29, Hokkaido

L29.5, deer bone, cotton, needle and thread, coin

Futatsuiwa site, Abashin, Hokkaido

Stone Rod (replica), Final Jomon

5, wood,

bamboo

MPM: Milwaukee Public Museum

Uncatalogued: Hokkaido no sbiki (fiiyu): Fukuro no
199 I

N I 7000 Ikupasuy

siimu mori (Four Seasons in Hokkaido: Winter),

Fig. 46.17, p. 334

Fig. 47.31, p. 350

Hokkaido

By Noriko Kawamura, Otani Junior College, Sapporo

L34.3,- wood

Textile
NI 7025 Bow

Pedestal Vessel, Epi Jomon

1 99 I

Fig. 29.4 (upper), p. 210

Fig. 3.10, p. 43

Llncatalogued: Mokurei (Wooden Spirit),

Minamikawa site, Setana-cho, Hokkaido

Fig. 47.32, p. 350

Acc 1969, Edward V. Dommcr Foundation

L2 I, W27, Dl 2.5, earthenware

By Noriko Kawamura, Otaru, Hokkaido

L120, wood, bark

L300, W1 80, textile
Ceramic Vessel, Incipient Jomon

N I 7027 Ladle

Fig. 3.4, p. 40

Fig. 28.9 (upper), p. 205

Narukawa site, Narukawa-cho, Hokkaido

KM: Kitanihon Minceisha Co., Ltd.

L20.3, W 17.6, DO.6, ceramic

Location and date of collection unknown
L66, wood

(Sapporo)
1960s

N 1 705 3 Ritual Sword

Engraved Needlecase (replica), Okhotsk

Uncatalogued: Figures of Man and Woman,

Fig. 3.19, p. 46

Fig. 47.3, p. 336

Fig, 13.8, p. 107

Bentento site, Nemuro, Hokkaido

By Suzuki, Asahikawa, Hokkaido

Acc 1969, Edward V. Dommer Foundation

L8.3, Wl .5, D1.1, birdbone

L65.6, D30, wood, paint

L32.5, wood

1980

N17056 Ritual Quiver

Ceramic Figurine (replica), Final Jomon

Uncatalogued: Winter (Hibernation),

Fig. 4.6, p. 50

Fig. 47.10, p. 339

Fig. 38.13, p. 272

Ohnakayama site, Nanae, Hokkaido

By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido

Acc. 1969, Edward V. Dommer Foundation

L18.4, W14.5, D7.2; earthenware

H47.5, W45, D23.5; walnut

L51, W14, wood

N17058 Makiri, Sheath, Netsuke

Lacquered Comb (replica), Late Jomon

Llncatalogued: Bear and Hutiter (Ekasbi), 1 973

Fig. 4.5, p. 50

Fig. 47.16, p. 342

Fig. 1.24, p. 21

Bibi-4 site, Chitose, Hokkaido

By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

Acc. 1969, Edward V. Dommer Foundation

L1 1.8, W7.3, DO.6; wood, lacquer

L69.5, W78, D56.5,- Casteraralia wood

L25.6, W7.5; wood, bone, iron, glass bead

CHECKLIST

385

N I 71OOA Flower Arrows
Fig. 35.8, p. 251

NMNH: National Museum of Natural
History, Washington, D.C.

Hokkaido
Wood, feathers

150682 Garden Hoe
Fig. 32.14, p. 239
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido

19415 Semicircular Plate

L93, W30.4, Hi2.7, hardwood

Fig. 1.9, p 13
N 1 7284C Flower Arrows
Figs. 35.8, p. 251, 42.13, p. 295

H. Capron, col. 1875, Hokkaido

1 50685 Octagonal Bowl

I. 26.5, W19, H2.5, wood

Fig. 19,5, p. 150
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Bekkai, Hokkaido

Hokkaido
Wood, feathers

E22194 Grapevine Sandals

L29.2, W30.5, H6.3; wood

Fig. 29.26, p 221
N I 7285C, E Flower Arrows
Fig. 35.8, p. 251

B. Lyman, col. 1876, Hokkaido

I 50688 Cloth Mittens

L24.7; grapevine bark, linden bark

Fig. 8.7, p. 78
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido

Hokkaido
Wood, feathers

E22259 Smoking Kit

L22.7, Wl2.7, HO 6; cotton cloth

Fig. 18.1, p. 138
N I 7296 Carved Platter
Fig. 28.12, p. 207

B. Lyman, col. 1876, Hokkaido

150698 Ikupasuy

L33, Wl 1.5, H5, hardwood

Fig. 19.3, p. 149
R Hitchcock, col. 1888, Etorofu, Kurile Islands

Hokkaido
L26.7, W21.9, walnut

22261 Ikupasuy

L33, W3.2, HO.6, wood

Fig. 1.12, p. 14
N I 7302 Ikupasuy

B. Lyman, col. 1876, Yokohama

Fig. 36.7, p. 259

L38, W2.5, Hi.2, wood

1 50706 Beaded Necklace
Fig. 10.7, p. 91
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Hokkaido

Hokkaido
E022269 Wooden Spatula
NI 7340A, B Knife Handle and Sheath

Fig. 42.20, p. 299

Fig. 32.4, p. 236

B. Lyman, col, 1876, Hokkaido

Hokkaido

L20.7, W3.6, Hi.2, wood

L23, wood, iron
El 50637 Salmon-Skin Boots
N1 7346 Ritual Sword

Fig. 29.25, p. 220

Fig. 38.12, p. 273

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Bekkai, Hokkaido

Acc. 1969, Edward V. Dommer Foundation

L21.8, W20 2, H 10; salmon skin

L25, wood

L50.8, W 12.7, H 1.3, glass beads, brass, thread
I 5071 5 Tattoo Knife
Fig. 45.32, p. 326
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido
L19.7, W2.5, Hi.3; wood, metal

I 5072 1 A Birchbark Bowl
Fig. 19.4, p. 150
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido
L2 1.6, W14, I 15.7,- birchbark, wood

I 50638 Iron-Tipped Arrow
N 1 7357A, B Knife Handle and Sheath

Fig. 29.4, p. 210

Fig. 30.3, p. 223

R Hitchcock, col. 1888, Shari, Hokkaido

Acc. 1969, Edward V. Dommer Foundation

L49.5, W1.2, HO.6, wood, iron, feather

L43.2, whalebone, cherry bark

1 50722 Wooden Spoon
Fig. 47.2, p. 336
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Etorofu, Kurile Islands
L30.5, W4.4, H4.4, wood

150642 Bow
N I 736 I Spirit Figurine

Fig. 29.4, p. 210

Fig. 38.7, p, 271

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Hokkaido

Acc. 1969, Sakhalin

L107.5, W8.3, H 1.8, wood, cherry bark

L27.2, wood

1 50725 Salmon Skin
Fig. 19.6B, p. 151
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Abashiri, Hokkaido
L49.5, W 17.8, I 16.3,- salmon skin

I 50649 Attush Leggings
N1 7363 Spirit Figurine

Fig. 19.9, p. 153

Fig. 38.8, p. 271

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Abashiri, Hokkaido

Fig. 29.19, p. 216

Acc 1969, Sakhalin

L31.2, W29.2, HO.6, elm bark, thread

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido

L15.6, wood

El 50729 Knife and Sheath

L29.2, Wl7.1, H2.5, wood, metal
I 50653 Elm-Bark Fiber

HMCAS: Hokkaido Museum of

Fig. 19.7, p. 151

El 50764 Spring Bow

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Abashiri, Hokkaido

Fig. 29.6, p. 212

L55.9, W20.3, H8.3; elm bark

R. Hitchcock, col 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido
L55.8, W81.2, I 110.1; wood

Contemporary Art, Sapporo
Uncatalogued: Kami no shita (Tongue of God), I 980
Fig. 47.18, p. 343
By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

1 50670 Ladle
Fig. 28,9 (lower), p 205

1 50768 Baby Carrier

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Piratori, Hokkaido

Fig. 6.5, p. 64

L48.2, Wl 3.3, I 15.7; wood

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Shikotan Island, Kurile Islands
L48; wood, grass

H201; Japanese oak
1 50675 Sea-Mammal Spear
Fig. 29.13, p. 214
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Hokkaido

NME: National Museum of

Ll 19 (three sections); wood, metal, rope

El 50779 Man's Robe
Fig. 42.3, p, 289
R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Tsuishikari, Hokkaido
L.122, Wl27, H 1.2, elm bark, cotton thiead, embroidery, applique

Ethnology, Osaka
Hi 89023 Fucbi, 1993
Fig. 47.1 3, p. 340
By Takeki Fujito, Akan, Hokkaido
H162; walnut wood

386

I 50677 Elm Bark

1 50780 Womans Robe

Fig. 45.2, p. 314

Fig. 19.8, p. 152

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Abashiri, Hokkaido

R. Hitchcock, col. 1888, Tsuishikari, Hokkaido

L75, Wl 1.4, H3.1, elm bark

L 121.5; elm bark, cotton thread, embroidery, applique

CHECKLIST

324509 Wooden Plate

E3382 Five-String Tonkori

51603 Duckskin Robe

Fig. 42.19, p. 299

Fig. 41.6, p. 284

Fig. 45.6, p 3 16

Stockbridge, col. 1922

M. Todd, col. 1896, Esashi, Hokkaido

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Kurile Islands

L24.1, W22.9, H2.5; wood

L97.5, W24.8, 1 14,5; wood

Duckskin, feathers

3245 I I Inaw Knife

E3 390 Child's Coat

5 1 605 Sealskin Mittens

Fig. 31.8, p 231

Fig. 42.2, p 288

Fig. 29.16, p. 215

Stockbridge, col. 1922

M. Todd, col. 1896, Esashi, Hokkaido

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Shana Storop,

Sheath L20.3, W5, H 1.9, Knife: L21.6, W3.2, H1.3,
wood, ivory, iron

L90.2, W1 37, H3.8, salmon skin, cloth

325243 Man's Knife

Fig. 42.18, p. 299

5 I 625 Beaded Necklace

Fig. 32.6, p. 236

Ll 8, Wl4, H7.6, wood

Fig, 18.2, p. 139

Kurile Islands
L24.8, Wl9, Hi .9, sealskin

E7909 Wooden Bowl

Novakovsky, col 1923, Hokkaido
L35.6, W20.3, F13.2, wood, bone, iron, cord

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Storop, Kurile Islands
El 6503 Robe

L55.8, Wl 5.4, H3.8, glass beads, lead beads

Fig. 45.7, p 317

Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka Collection

E. Morse (?), acc. 1916, Hokkaidof?)

5 1 630 Coiled-Grass Basket with Lid

Elm bark, cotton thread, embroidery, applique

Fig. 43.6, p. 304
A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Shikotan Island,

Uncatalogued: Towel Hanger
Fig. 1 1.3, p. 93
Col I 829, Hokkaido
Rack: L40, H46.8; Case: L43.2, WlO, H4.3;
walnut wood, Japanese cedar, bamboo nails

El 7874 Three Hunters Ainu-e

Kurile Islands

Fig. 29.1, p. 208

L5.7, W8.9, grass

By Koretsu Matsumae
E. Morse, col. before 1920, Hokkaidof?)

51631 Needlecase Set

L179.3, W52.2, paper

Fig. 128, p 23
A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Shikotan Island,

OVOH

Otoineppu Village Office,

Hokkaido

E75 I 90 "Invasion of Yezo by Russians"

Kurile Islands

Fig. 7.4, p 70

Lea. 15, bone, wood, animal hide, pigment,
copper wire

Uncataloged: Ki'men (Wooden Masks), 1975

Artist unknown, Publication on the Ainu People oj Japan,
undated

Figs. 1.29, p. 25; 47.15A, B, p.341

L18.4, W26, paper, ink

51643 Ikupasuy

By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

Fig. 46.18, p. 334

L30.5, W18, D7; L38.5, W21, D14.5, wood

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Nemuro

PMC: Peabody Museum of Archaeology
Uncataloged: Juka (Wooden Flowers), 1989
Fig. 47.19, p 344
By Bikky Sunazawa, Otoineppu, Hokkaido
L210, W210, H280, willow wood

Uncataloged: Gozen sanji no gangu
(Toys at 3:00 A.M.), 1978

and Ethnology (Cambridge,

L35, W3.8, HO.6, wood

51646 Ikupasuy

Massachusetts)

Fig. 30.6, p. 225

64026 Twined Basket

A Agassiz, col. before 1893(?), Nemuro

Fig. 43 1, p. 301

L33.7, W3.8, HO.6, wood

Col. before 1904
L4I.3, W 19.7, Hi2.7, elm bark

Fig. 47.22, p. 345

51647 Ikupasuy
Fig. 46.16, p. 333

By Bikky Sunazawa, Sapporo, Hokkaido

86052 Wooden Pipe

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Nemuro

H44.5, W52, D25.5, wood

Fig. 33.10, p. 245

L33, W3.8, HO.6, wood

L. H Farlow, col. before 1915
L31 1, W2, wood, metal

(Salem, Massachusetts)
E491 Embroidered Boots
Fig. 42.6, p. 291

D3260 Ikupasuy

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Nemuro

Fig. 46.18, p. 334

L35, W3.8, HO.6; wood

L Warner, col before 1928
L36.8, W3 I, HO.6, wood

E. Morse, col. 1882, Ishikari River region, Hokkaido
L36.8, W24 I, H14, fishskin, velvet, cotton

El990 Bone Carving
Fig. 42.9, p. 293
O. Esche, col. before 1874, Sakhalin

5 1648 Ikupasuy
Fig. 46.18, p. 334

PEM: Peabody Essex Museum

51649 Ikupasuy
Fig. 30.5, p. 225

7044 Sealskin Robe

A. Agassiz, col. before 1893, Nemuro

Fig. 45.17, p, 320

L33, W3.8, HO.6, wood

Brooks, col before 1888, Sakhalin
L108, W1 33, seal and fox skins, glass beads, silk, velvet,
cotton bast, wool fabrics

L8.9, W5, H 1.7, ivory
7046 Wooden Bowl
E3105 Weft Beater

Fig. 28.1 1, p. 206

Fig. 45.5e, p. 315

Brooks, col. before 1888, Hokkaido

Matsuki, location and date unknown

L21, W21, ! 19.5; wood

RTBE: Rausu Town Board of Education
Uncataloged: Vessel with Bear's Head Carving
(replica), Okhotsk Culture
Fig. 3.1 1, p. 43
Matsunorikawa Kitagishi site, Rausu, Hokkaido
L32, W3 1.5, DI 3.7, charred wood

L36.8, W6.3, H 1.7, wood
22431 Bowl with Ledge Handle
E3279 Festival Scene Ainu-e

Fig. 28.13, p. 206

Fig. 33.1, p. 240

Col. before 1879, Sakhalin (?)

By Byozan Hirasawa, Scenes ojEzo Everyday Life, 1871

L27.3, W15.2, H7.0; wood

E. Morse, col. 1871

ROM: Royal Ontario Museum (Toronto)
888.6.13 Smoking Kit
Fig. 1.20, p. 19

L89, W57; silk, paint

E. Odium, col. 1888, Shana, Kurile Islands
Cherry bark, wood, bearskin, metal, glass bead

CHECKLIST
387

Chinita Sunazawa
A Daughter’s Happiness,

1 99 1

Fig, 47.33, p. 351
By Chinita Sunazawa

Uncatalogued: Untitled, 1 992
Fig, 47.36, p. 352

61049 Blowfish Amulet

A479 Boy's Bow

Fig. 13.2, p. 103

Fig. 34.2, p. 246

S. Kodama, col. 1929-1970

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Okotsonai, Hokkaido

L10.3, W6.1, H7.1; blowfish

L42.5, wood

62228 Mans Knife

A494 Bear Skull and Mandible

Fig. 32.5, p. 236

Fig. 35.10, p. 253

S. Kodama, col. 1929-1079, Hokkaido

H. Hiller, col 1901, Motomuroran, Hokkaido

L24.3, W3.7, Hi.9, ivory, bone, tooth, steel

Wood, bone

Fig. 47.35, p. 353

IIPM: University of Pennsylvania Museum

A5 1 6 Galloping Toy

By Chinita Sunazawa

of Archaeology and Anthropology

By Chinita Sunazawa

Uncatalogued: Yang, 1997

Li 93, Wl 30, acrylic on canvas

56.8.9 Tobacco Pipe with Burl Bowl

Fig. 34.3, p. 246
H. Hiller, col 1901, Piratori, Hokkaido
Ll 1, clamshell, rope

Fig. 33.11, p. 245
Uncatalogued: Yin, 1998
Fig. 47.36, p. 352

Hartshorne, col. 1897-1900, Hokkaido

A53 I C Bear Cub's Toy

Li9.3, W3.5, D2.2,■ wood

Fig. 35.3, p. 250

By Chinita Sunazawa
L193, W130, acrylic on canvas

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Rubeshibe, Hokkaido
A402 Womans Embroidered Hood

L22.5, wood

Fig. 21.4, p. 164
H. Hiller, col. 1901, Motomoruran, Hokkaido

AI 7744 Knife with Eagle-Beak Sheath

L40.8, cotton

Figs. 21.6, 21. 6A, p. 167

Uncatalogued: Untitled, ca. 1960s

A407A, B Bent-Wood Snowshoes

Fig. 47.28, p. 348

Fig. 29.22, p. 218

A: L39.5, W4, D2; B: L31.5, W5, D2.2, wood, steel,
cherry bark, pearl, puffin beak, bird claw

By Peramonkoro Sunazawa, Akan, Hokkaido

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Shiraoi, Hokkaido

Textile

L45, W22.5, Dl 1.5; wood, deerhide, sinew

L122-19 Woman's Ceremonial Robe

Uncatalogued: Ichitaro Sunazawa, Carved
Mask, 1992

A442A Bear-Cub Feeding Trough

M. Schaffer, col. 1909, Piratori, Hokkaido

Fig. 35.3, p. 250

Ll 31, Wl23, D5.5, cotton, thread, embroidery, applique

Fig. 14.3, p 111

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Shiraoi, Hokkaido

By Kazuo Sunazawa, Akan, Hokkaido

L68.6, wood

Ll 22-32 Plaited Basket

A454 Hunter's Pouch

M. Schaffer, col. 1909, Piratori, Hokkaido

Fig. 2.8, p. 36

L26, W28, D19; linden bark

Kazuo Sunazawa

Eldredge, col. before 1895, prob. Yokohama

Fig. 42.4, p, 290

L30, Wl6, HI I, wood

Fig. 44.6, p. 312

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Okotsonai, Hokkaido

AMS:

The Ainu Museum

L29, W18, D8,- bearskin

at Shiraoi
60542 Sun Visor
Fig. 24.6, p. 186
S. Kodama, col. 1929-1970
L90; cotton, silk

61022 Female Spirit-Guardian Necklace
Fig. 44.3, p. 310
S. Kodama, col. 1929-1970
L20, W1.2; cotton cord, glass beads

Kan Wada Collection
A457A Birchbark Torch
Fig. 29.10, p. 213
H. Hiller, col. 1901, Okopunai, Hokkaido
L29, W5.5, D4, birchbark

Uncatalogued: Amulet String
Fig. 37.2, p. 262
B. Wada, col 1945, Novoe, Sakhalin
L40, leather, metal, wood

A458A, B, C Smoking Kit
Fig. 42.15, p, 297
H Hiller, col

1901, Yezo/Hokkaido

A: L32.5, W2, Dl, B L38, W3, D7; C: L9.3,
W9, D4.5, wood, bronze, cowrie shell, tobacco,
vegetable fiber

61025 Female Spirit-Guardian Necklace

Uncatalogued. Two-Headed Nipopo Doll
Fig. 37.4, p. 263
B. Wada, col. 1945, Novoe, Sakhalin
L27.5, W1 1, H7.5, wood, cloth

Llncatalogued: Nipopo Doll

Fig. 38.6, p. 270

A470B Wooden Club

Fig. 37,5, p. 263

S. Kodama, col. 1929-1970

Fig. 33.6, p. 243

B. Wada, col. 1945, Novoe, Sakhalin

L36.2, W3.3; cotton cord, grass

H. Hiller, col. 1901, Hokkaido

L27, W6.5, wood, cloth, glass bead

388

CHECKLIST

List of
Illustrations

Fic

Pace Caption title

3.4

40

Ceramic Vessel

42.3

1

3.5

41

Killer Whale

41.1

2-3 Crane Dance

3.6

42

Ceramic Mask (replica)

3.7

42

Owl Eyes

3.8

42

Ceramic Figurine

3.9

42

Stone Rod (replica)

3.10

43

Pedestal Vessel

3.1 1

43

Bear-Effigy Vessel (replica)

3.12-3.14

44

Fishhook and Harpoons (replicas)

Atlush Robe

Introduction
Ainu Ethnicity: A History

8

1.0
11

9
9

1.2

Ishu retsuzo (Portraits of Ezo Chieftains)

Man and Woman of Shari
Blessing Ritual

1.3

10

Traditional and Modern Ainu
Territories

3.15A, B, 3.16

45

Effigy Spoons (replica)

1.4

10

Villagers of Shikotan, Kurile Islands

3.17

44

Wide-Mouth Vessel

1 5

1 1

Ainu of Sakhalin

3.18

46

Sea-Otter Figurine (replica)

3.19

46

Engraved Needlecase (replica)

16

1 1

Sea-Lion Hunters of Moneron Island

1.7

12

Native Peoples of the Greater North
Pacific

Ainu Ties with Ancient Cultures of Northeast Asia

1.8

12

Ainu Documentation Team

4.1

47

Winter in a Sakhalin Village

1.9, 110

13

Ainu Design

4,2

48

III

14

Bringing the Bear to Iyomante

Microlithic Industries of Siberia and
East Asia

1 12

14

Prayer Stick

4.3

49

1 13

15

Ainu and the "Caucasoid Hypothesis'

Upper-Paleolithic Artifacts from
Sakhalin

I 14

15

A Queer People

4.4

49

Late-Neolithic Artifacts from Sakhalin

115

16

Twined Basket

4 5

50

Lacquered Comb (replica)

4 6, 4.7

50

Evocative Women

4.8

51

Bronze Belt Ornaments (replicas)

4.9

50

Needlecase with Geometric Engraving
(replica)

4.10

51

Sakhalin Okhotsk Assemblage

4.1 1

51

Mixed-Race Family of Sakhalin

I 16

16

"All the World's a Stage"

117

17

Population History Model

118

17

Early Ainu Art

119

18

Ainu Chieftain

1 20

19

Making it Ainu

1.21

19

Traditional Tobacco Box

122

20

Woman with Weaving Instrument

123

22

Nanai Motif

1 24

21

Matin' with Bead and Bear

1.25

22

Morew Pattern

126

22

Eskimo Spirit Carving

127

23

Sealskin Boots

1 28

23

Kurile Needlecases

1.29

25

Ki-men (Wooden Mask)

1.30

24

Sea Otter

1.31

26

Ainu Cultural Rebirth

I

Theories of Ainu Origins

Ainu Origin Theories
1.0

28

Ichirikayani, Son of Ikotoi

1.1

29

Abashiri Ainu

1.2

30

Ainu Men of Sakhalin

Ancient People of the North Pacific Rim: Ainu
Biological Relationship with Their Neighbors

Ainu Woman on the Amur

5.1

52

5.2

54

Sinodont and Sundadont Tooth Types

5.3

55

Jomon Teeth

5.4

56

Ainu Genetic Distances

5.5

56

Ainu Cranial Distances

Ainu Language: 1Features and Relationships
6.1

57

Map of Hokkaido Ainu Dialects

6.2

60

Preparing Inaw

6.3

61

Entertaining Japanese Officials

6.4

63

Ainu Place-names

6.5, 6.6

64

Carrying Children

II

History

Ainu History: An Overview
Ainu Homelands: Natural History from Ice Ace to

7.0

66

Modern Times

7.1

67

Ikotoi, Chieftain of Atsukeshi
Uimam Ceremony

68

Ainu Sword and Hanger
Shakushain

2.1

32

Ice-Age East Asia and Today

7,2

2.2

32

Sea-Level History

7.3

69

2.3

33

Bathymetry of Soya Strait

7.4

70

Invasion of Ezo by Russians

2 4

33

Late Glacial Fauna

7.5

71

Ainu Northern Regions Before 1868

2.5

34

Present Vegetation Zones of North
and East Asia

7.6

71

Hokkaido and Surroundings, 1869-1945

7.7

72

Modern Hokkaido

2.6

34

Phytogeography of Japan at Late
Glacial Maximum

2.7

35

Vegetation History

2.8

36

Hunter’s Bearskin Pouch

2.9

36

Salmon and Ainu Today

2.10

37

Chief Noshikosa of Shamokotan

2.1 1 A, B

38

Land-use Change from Meiji Period
to Present

2.12

38

Kingfisher Owl, Guardian of the
Village

Early Ainu Contacts with the Japanese
Historical Map of Northern Tohoku
and Hokkaido

8.1

74

8.2

75

A Fishery Scene from Ezo Country

8 3

76

The Japanese Ezo Fishery

8.4

77

Trade Goods and Ceremonial Life

8.5

77

Lacquered Cups and Saucer Stands

8.6

77

Mutual Influence

8.7

78

Cloth Mittens

Prehistoric Hokkaido and Ainu Origins
3.1

39

Duck-Effigy Flute (replica)

3.2

40

Archaeological Cultures of Hokkaido

3.3

40

Geological Stratigraphy and Culture
Periods of Misawa River Region in
Chitose and Tomakamai Regions

Ainu-e. A Historical Review
9.1

79

Pictorial Biography of Prince Sbotoku

9.2

80

Seisuiji En'gi (History of Seisui Temple

9.3

81

Illustrated Gazetteer of Ezo

9.4

82

Hunting

389

9.5

82

Iyomante

16.7

129 Ainu Exhibitions Begin

23.4

9.6

83

Tobu

16.8

129 Ainu Dwelling Display

23.5

179 Kurile Box

9.7

84

Catching an Eagle

16.9

130 Tokunai Mogami

23.6

179 Sakhalin Necklace

9.8

85

Iyomante

16.10

13 1

Trading Brokers and Partners with China,
Russia, and Japan

Ainu Objects in European
Museum Collections

178 Antique-Store Lacquerware

23.7

180 Neil Munro's Nibutani Home

23,8

181

23.9

182 Lacquerware Tuki and Ikupasuy

Tobacco Box and Pipe Holder

The St. Petersburg Ainu Collections

10.1

86

Ainu Maritime Traders

17.1

133 Kurile Robe

The Ainu Museum Foundation

10.2

86

Amur Santan Trade

17.2

134 Kurile Boat Model

24.1

183 The Ainu Museum in Shiraoi

10.3

87

Cultural Impact of Trade

17.3

1 34 Coiled-Grass Basket

24.2

184 Ainu Exhibits

10.4

89

Wealthy Sakhalin Ainu

17.4

1 35 Sakhalin Hospitality

24.3

184 Iyomante Ceremony

10.5

90

Necklace with Flowered Medallion

24.4, 24.5

185 Ainu Dance and Ceremony

10.6

91

Young Girl Wearing Necklace

Ainu Collections in North America: Documentation

24.6

186 Sun Visor

10.7

91

Necklace with Figure Medallion

Projects and the Frederick Starr Collections

24.7

186 Masahiro Nomoto Begins the
Smithsonian Ship Model

18 1

138 Smoking Kit

Tourism, Assimilation, and Ainu Survival Today

18.2

139 Beaded Necklace

11.1, 11.2

92

Bear Carving

18.3

140 Starr's Ainu Group m Tokyo

11.3 A, B, C

93

Towel Hanger

18.4

140 The Ainu Group in St. Louis

25.1

187 Beautiful Japan, Take One

11.4

94

Japanese Clogs

18.5

141

Comparing Notes

25.2

188 Beautiful Japan, Take Two

11.5

94

"Museum Ainu"

18.6

141

A Live-in Exposition

11,6

95

"Ainus Ride Usually Without Saddle"

18.7

142 Goodwill Ambassadors

IV.

AinuMosir: Land Spirit and Culture

18.8

143 Starr's Legacy

18.9

144—45 Ainu Robe

The Ainu and the Early Modern
Iapanese State, 1600-1868
12.1

96

Ainu Man with Bow and Sword

12.2

97

Sword and Hanger

Romyn Hitchcock and the Smithsonian Ainu
Collection

12.3

98

Defeat and Oppression

19.IA.B

12.4

99

12.5

100 "Treasure"

12.6

101

Lacquerware Container

"A Couple of the Chief"

148 Ainu Man and Woman of Urap

19.2

149 Two Ainu Men

19.3

149 "Mr. Ikupasuy"

19.4, 19.5

150 Cherry-bark and Wooden Bowls

19.6A B, 19.7 151
19.8, 19.9
19.10a,b

154 Ainu Exhibits

I3.i

19.1 1

153 Carved Plates

152 Attush Robe and Leggings

13.2

103 Spmy-Blowfish Amulet

13.3

104 Influenza Amulet

Batchelor, Starr, and Culin: The Brooklyn Museum

13.4

105 Smallpox Amulet

of Art Collection

13.5

105 Prayer Stick

20,1, 20.2

155 Culin and the Ainu

13.6

106 Caring for a Corpse

20.3, 20.4

156 Snowshoes and Deer Hunter

13.7

106 Burning the House of the Deceased

20.5

157 Fishskin Boots

13.8

107 Ritual Sword

20.6

158 Beaded Necklace

20.7
From Assimilation to Indigenous Rights: Ainu
Resistance Since i 869
14.1

108 Protest March

14.2

110 Chikabumi Ainu Protestors

14.3

1 1 1

14.4

1 12 Sakhalin Ainu in Tsuishikari, Hokkaido

14.5

113 Ainu Organizational Meeting, 1973

14.6

114 Ainu Flag

Portrait of Ichitaro Sunazawa

Ainu and Northwest Coast Peoples: A Comparison

20.8A.B

159 Ikupasuy
161-62 Retarpe

An Enthusiastic Quest: Hiram Hiller and Jenichiro
Oyabe in Hokkaido, 1901
21.1, 21.2

Kamuy. Gods You Can Argue With
26.0

192 Shimochi, Grand Chieftain of Atsukishi

26.1

193 Itiate: Messengers to the Gods

26.2

193 fitaiD-Carving Tool

26.3, 26.4

194 Carving Inate

26.5

195 Ikupasuy

26.6

196 Ikupasuy Stories

26.7

197 Exorcising Illness

Raw Materials

Foreign Contagions, Ainu Medical Culture,
and Conquest
102 Exorcising Illness

The Ainu in Ethnographic Films

162 Hiller and Oyabe

21.3

163 Hiller and Oyabes Hokkaido Travels

21.4, 21.5

164 Old-Style Headgear

21.6

165 Benkai's Family at Nusa

21.7

166 Spouted Pot

21.8

167 Tasbiro with Eagle Beak

1 HE AINU tCOSYSTEM

27.1

198 Village Economy

27.2

198 Ainu Kotan

27.3

199 Changing Lands, Changing Media

27.4

199 Ainu Ecosystem

27.5

200 River-Fishing Expedition

27.6

201

Ice Fishing

Foods of Choice
28.1

202 June: Gathering Seaweed

28.2, 28.3

203 Stripping Grain

28.4

203 Ainu Foods

28.5

204 Fish Roe Masher

28.6-28.8

204 Cooking Utensils

28.9

205 Serving Ladles

28.10

206 Kurile Spoons

28.11—28.13 206 Bowls and Platter
28.14

207 Brewing Rice Wine

28.15

207 Storehouse

Technology, Settlement, and Hunting Ritual

15.1

116 Ainu Totem Pole

29.1

208 Family of Hunters

15.2

119 Named Ainu Groups in Hokkaido

29.2

209 Hunter in Mountain Clothes

15.3

121

29.3

209 Deer Call

15.4

122 Chosama, Chief of Uraashibetsu

Skidegate Village

III. Ainu Discovery: Collectors,

From Snowshoe to "Corn Mortars":
Early Ainu Collections at the American
Museum of Natural History

29.4, 28.5

210 Deer Hunting

22.1

29.6, 28.8

212 Hunting the Bear
212 Spring Bow Trap

168 Shiraoi Amu

22.2

169 Bashford Dean

29.7

22.3

170 Crescent Carving

29.9-28 11

213 Salmon Fishing

22.4

171

29.12, 29.13

214 Toggling Harpoons
214 Sea-hunting Expedition

It’s an Ikupasuy!

Museums and the Public

22.5

170 Ikupasuy

29.14

The European Image of the Ainu as Reflected

22.6

172—73 Sakhalin Retarpe

29.15

215 Dogsled Travel

in Museum Collections

22.7

174 Tobacco Pouch

29.16

215 Sealskin Mitts

16.0

22.8

174 Carved Pipe

29.17, 29.18

216 Preparation of Poison for Hunting

22.9, 22.10

175 Strike-a-Light Kit

29.19

216 Makiri

124 Mautaroke, Grand Chieftain of
Uraashibetsu

16.1, 16.2

125 Early European Views

16.3

126 Philipp Franz von Siebold

16.4
16.5
16.6

390

29.20

217 Quiver with Hunting Bag and Arrows

Japanese Ainu Collections

29.21

217 Mountain Knife

126 Heinrich von Siebold

23.1

176 Wood Tray

29.22

218 Snowshoes

126 Erwin Baelz

23.2

177 Attush Sample Kit

29.23

218 Hunter on Skis

127 Bear Ceremony

23.3

177 Modern Ainu Bags

29.24

220 Salmon-skin Boots with Fishscale Tread

29.25

220 Nonskid Boots

29.26

221

Grapevine Sandals

The Ainu on Whales and Whaling

36.4

258 Sending Ceremony for Broken Tools

Saran/p and Tenki-. Ainu Basketry and

36.5

259 Destroyed House

North Pacific Affinities

36.6

259 Fox-Sending Site

43.1

301

36.7

259 Bear Ceremonialism

43.2, 43.3

302 Saranip

43.4

303 Ainu Folk Crafts

43.5

303 Archival Documentation

43.6

304 Coiled-Crass Basket

43.7

305 Decorated Tenki

43.8

305 Twined Yup’ik Basket

43.9

307 Modern Yup'ik Basket

30.1

222 Launching a Boat

30.2

223 Stranded-Whale Dance

Ainu Shamanism

30.3

223 Whalebone Knife

37.1

30.4

224 Ikupasuy Carvings

37.2

262 Amulet String

30.5, 30.6

225 Killer Whale Marks

37.3

263

30.7

226 Humpback Whale

37.4, 37.5

263 Nipopo Dolls

37.6

264 Shaman Belt

37.7

267 Marching to Ward Off Evil Spirits

Home and Settlement: Chise and Kotan

261

31.1

227 Amu Mosir, Kamuy Mosir

31.2

228 Ainu Village in Winter

Life and Death

31.3

228 At Ikorek's House

38.1

31.4

228 Shell Lamp

31.5, 31.6

229 Floor Plan

31.7

229 Inaw

31.8

229 Makiri for Carving Inaw

3 1 9A-D

230--31 Ainu House Construction

31.10

232 Woman's Ritual Belt

31.11

233 Traditional Ainu House

VlLLACE WORK: GENDER ROLES AND SEASONAL WORK

32.1

234 February: Hunting in the Mountains

32.2

234 Quiver and Arrows

32.3

235

32.4-32.6

236 Men's Knives

32.7

237 Pillow Box

32.8

237 Gathering Maple Syrup

32.9, 32.10

238 Wild Harvest

32.1 1, 32.12

239 Making Rice Cakes

32.13

238 April: Twisting Thread

32.14

239 Carden Hoe

Shamanic Seance

Ritual Sacrifice of Dogs

268--69 Offering Condolences to the
Chieftain

A Personal Rebirth through Traditional Ainu Basketry

44 l

309 Making a Basket

44.2

310 Ikupasuy with Swordfish

44.3

310 Female Spirit Guardian

44 4

311

Woven Basket

38.2

269 Grave of an Ainu Chief in Sakhalin

44.5

312 Basketry Technique

38.3-38 5

270 Mourning and Burial

44.6

312 Plaited Basket

38.6

270 Spirit Guardian

44.7

312 Weaving with a Loom

38.7, 38.8

271

Spirit Figures

38.9

272 Grave Markers

Clothing and Ornamentation

38.10

272 Grave Posts and Burial Articles

45.1

313 A Variety of Fashions

38.11

272 Crave Posts from West Ezo

45.2-45 4

314 Preparing Obyo

38.12

272--73 Ritual Sword

45.5A-E

315 From Fiber to Fabric

38.13

272

Ritual Quiver

45.6

316 Duckskin Robe

38.14

273

Bear Fetish

45.7

317 Attusb Robe

38.15

273 Entrance to the Other World

45.8

318 Ainu Robe and Japanese Kimono

45.9

318 Cbikarkarpe Robe

45.10

318 Chijiri Robe

45.1 1

318 Ruunpe Robe

45.12

319 Ruunpe Robe

45 1 3

319 Kaparamip Robe

blunting Croup with Dog
Mythology and Animal Tales

274 Goddess of the Cave

39.1

Yukar

Epics of Heroes

40.1

278 Man Reciting Yukar

45.14

319 Retarpe Robe

40.2

280 Contemporary Presentations of Yukar

45 15

319 Spearing Octopus

45.16

319 Women of Piratori

45.17

320 Sealskin Robe

45.18

320 Design School

To Live Is to Sing
Ainu Sociality

Twined Basket

41.1

282 Crane Dance

41.2, 41.3

283

Playing the Mukkuri

45 19

321

Ainu Design Motifs

41 4

284 Playing the Tonkori

45.20

321

Embroidery Stitches

41.5, 41.6

284 Tonkori

45.21

321

Needlecase

41.7

285 Sword Dance

45.22

322 Embroidered Headband

41.8

285 Dancing Continues

45.23

322 Choker

45.24

323 Attusb Apron

244 Praying with Inaw

45.25, 45.26

323

33.10

245 Pipe with Carved Decoration

45,27

324 Beaded Necklace

33.11

245 Pipe with Burl Bowl

45 28, 45.29

324 Necklaces with Medallion

45.30, 45.31

325 Beaded Earrings

45.32

326 Tattoo Knife

33.1

240 Festival Scene

33.2

241

Greeting Demonstration

33.3

241

Greeting Ritual

33.4, 33.5

242 Sakhalin Ainu Iyomante

33.6, 33.7

243 Corporal Punishment

33.8

244 Tobacco Pouch

33.9

V.

Even Without A Word

For Art
Ainu Children's Play

Ainu Art: The Beginnings of Tradition

Rosette Mold and Choker

34 l

246 Girls Playing Cat’s Cradle

42.0

286 Chieftain of Heshikai, Poloya

45.33

326 Arm Tattoos

34.2-34.4

246 "Galloping Clams" and Other Toys

42.1

287 Ainu Fashion

45.34

326 Sword and Sword Holder

34.5 A-D

247 Games

42.2

288 Child's Salmon-Skin Coat

34.6

247 Teaching Sewing Skills

42.3

289 Attusb Robe

Ikupasuy: It’s Not a Mustache Lifter!

42.4

290 Retarpe Robe

46.1

327 Ikupasuy

42.5

291

Learning Designs

46.2

327 Ritual Use of the Ikupasuy

Embroidered Fishskin Boots

46.3

328 Offertory Ware

Spirit-Sending Ceremonies

35.1

248 Kamuy-nomi: Praying to the Gods

42.6

291

35.2

248--49 Exercising the Bear

42.7

292 Woman’s Tattooed Arm

46.4

328 Neil Munro and Patient

35.3-34.5

250 Care and Feeding

42.8

293

46.5

328 Tuki and Ikupasuy

35.6, 35.7

251

Iyomante

42.9

293 Bone Carving

46.6, 46.7

329 Prayers to Fuchi

35.8

251

Flower Arrows

42.10

294 Ikupasuy

46.8

329 Offering Prayers

35.9

252 Ikupasuy

42.1 I

294 Three Inaw

46.9 A-C

330 Bear-Sending Ceremony

35.10—35 12

253 Nusa and Benkai's Bear Skull

42.12

295 Ceremonial Headdress

46 10

331

Inaw and Kike-Ikupasuy

35.13

254 Fox Sending

42.13

295 Flower Arrow

46.1 1

331

Parts of the Ikupasuy

35.14

254 Nusa

42.14

296 Sword Holder

46.12

332 Orca Symbols

35.15, 35.16

255 Inaw for the Great Owl

42.15

297 Smoking Kit

46.13

332 Orca Sbirosbi

42.16, 42.17

298 Platter and Spatula

46.14

332 Lacquered Ikupasuy

The Archaeology of Iyomante

42.18

299 Bowl

46.15

333 Ikupasuy with Tuki Image

36.1

256

42.19

299 Plate

46.16

333 Three Ikupasuy

36.2

256 Nusa at Yurap Village

42.20

299 Eating Lltensil

46.17

334 Fantastic Ikupasuy

36.3

257 Dancing Before the Nusa

42.21

300 Needlecase

46.18

334 Three Ikupasuy

Iyomante The Bear-Sending Ceremony

Knife and Sheath

39*

Ainu Journey: From Tourist Art to Fine Arts

48.4

357 Chip-Sanke Ceremony

47.1

335 Chopstick Case and Cigarette Holder

48.5

358 Old Man and Child

47.2, 47.3

336 New Spoons and Figurines

47.4-47.6

337 Fetish to Fashion

Ainu in the International Arena

47.7, 47.8

338 Miniature Totem Poles

49.1

47.9

339 Kuma (Bear), 1993

359 Giichi Nomura, Former Executive
Director of Utari Kyukai (Ainu
Association of Hokkaido)Addressing
the United Nations General
Assembly, 10 December, 1992

47.10

339 Winter (Hibernation), 1980

47.11

340 Eagle Sculpture, 1978

47.12

340 Life-sized Wooden Figures, 1991-93

49.2

361

47.13

340 Fucbi, 1993

49.3

362 Toroshino Kaizawa (1889-1982)

Ainu Demonstration in Tokyo, 1992

47.14

341

Necklace, 1968

49.4

363 Oki Kano, Ainu Musician

47.15A.B

341

Ki-men (Wooden Masks), 1975

49.5

364 Think Globally, Act Locally

47.16

342 Bear and Hunter (Ekashi), 1973

49.6

365 Masahiro Nomoto

47.17

342 Totem Pole, 1979

47.18

343 Kami no sbila (Tongue of God), 1980

The Ainu Shinpo: A New Beginning

47.19

344 Jnka (Wooden Flower), 1989

50.1

366 Tokyo, 1992

47.20

344 Totem Pole at Kispiox

50.2

367 Ainu Lands and Resources

47,21

345 Images of British Columbia, 1983

50.3

368 Continuity and Change

47.22

345 Gozen sanji no gangu (Toys at 3.00 A.M.J,
1987

47.23

346 Praying to the Gods

51.1

369 Schools and Culture

47.24

346 Kaze ni kiku (Listening to the Wind),
1986/1988

51.2

370 The Ainu Rally in Sapporo

47.25

347 Yodsii no kaze (Four Winds), 1986

47.26

348 Kani (Crab), 1987

47.27

348 Nitne-kamuy (Evil God), 1988

47,28

348 Untitled, ca. 1960s

47.29

349 Ryo (Force or Spirit), 1989

47.30

350 Hokkaido no sink: Aki mon'yo (Four

47.31

350 Hokkaido no sbiki (fuyu): Fttkuro no

Beyond the Ainu Shinpo: An Ainu View

Ainu Language: Present and Future

Seasons in Hokkaido. Autumn Patterns), 1990

sumu mori (Four Seasons in Hokkaido,

W'iitfer: The Forest Where Owls Live), 1991
47.32

350 Mokurei (Wooden Spirit), 1991

47.33

351

47.34

352 Yin, 1998

47.35

353 Yang, 1997

47.36

352

47.37

353 Sad Fox, 1991

A Daughter's Happiness, 1991

Untitled, 1992

52.1

371

Language Education in Nibutani, May
1993

52.2

373 Declining Use of Ainu Language in
the Home

Itaomachip: Reviving a Boat-Building and
Tradinc Tradition

53.1

374 Ainu Boats Sail Again

53.2

375 Early Maritime Vessel

53.3

376 Building an Itaomachip

The Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

54.1

377 Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum

54.2

378 Ainu Culture Exhibitions

The HeartOuchi Conveyed

VI. Ainu Present and Future

55.1

Shishirimuka: A Saru River Tale

379 Tomoko Keira Listening to a Story
from Suteno-/ttcfci

48.0

354 Inikari, Chieftain of Barasanmo

55.2

379 Suteno-/ncfei Holding Tuki

48.1

355 Tadashi Kaizawa

55.3

48.2

356 Toroshino Kaizawa (1889-1982) with
Radishes

380 Peramonkoro Sunazawa with a
Sculpture by Her Son

55.4

381

HaruTorao, 1903-1991

48,3

356 Nibutani Dam

55.5

381

Into the Future

392

Bibliography

Abe, Masami (ed.)
1984 "Ainu sosetsu” (A study of the Ainu). In Ainu
shiryoshu (Resources on the Ainu). 2nd series, vol.
5. Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.

(Compiled by Chisato Dubreuil,
Igor Krupnik, Megumi Lincoln,
and Elisabeth Ward)

Adachi, Buntaro
1937 "Das Ohrenschmalz als Rassenmerkmal und der
Rassengeruch ('Achselgeruch') nebst Rassenunterschied der Schweissdrusen" (Earwax as
racial characteristic, and racial smell
["Achselgeruch"] juxtaposed with racial
differences in sweat glands). Zeitscbriftfiir
Rassenkunde und ihre Nachbargebiete—Stuttgart 6:
273-307.
Aiga, Tetsuo (ed.)
1985 Iyomante: Kamikawa-chiho no kumaokuri no kiroku
(Iyomante: Documents on the bear-sending
ceremony in Kamikawa district). Tokyo:
Shogakukan.
Aikens, C. Melvin, and Don E. Dumond
1986 "Convergence and Common Heritage: Some
Parallels in Archaeology of Japan and Western
North America." In Windows on the Japanese Past.
Studies in Archaeology and Prehistory, ed. Richard J.
Pearson, 163-78. Ann Arbor: Center for
Japanese Studies, University of Michigan.
Aikens, C. Melvin, and Takayasu Higuchi
1982 Prehistory of Japan. New York: Academic Press.
Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai
1969 Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu). 2 vols.
Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan
Ainu Bunka Shinko Kenkyu Suishin Kiko (ed.)
1998 Ainu kogei ten: Saharin Ainu no seikatsu bunka
(The world of Ainu craftsmanship: The lifestyle
of the Sakhalin Ainu). Sapporo: Ainu Bunka
Shinko Kenkyu Suishin Kiko
Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan
1985 Kikitori shiryo (Oral history). Shiraoi: Ainu
Minzoku Hakubutsukan.

Aoki, Nobehiro
1990 "Yoichi Ainu no minshu 'kamuyrini’ ni tsuite"
(About the Yoichi Ainu's folk custom,
"kamuyrini"). In Hokkaido no bunka (Cultures of
Hokkaido), no. 61. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Bunkazai Hogo Kyokai.
Aoyagi, Nobukatsu
1984 "Shisha o megutte" (Upon his death). In Kono
Hiromichi Hakusbi botsugo 20-shunen kinen ronbunshu
(Collected papers in commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of the death of Dr.
Hiromichi Kono), ed. Nobukatsu Aoyagi, 105—
20. Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
1997 "The Kono Collection and Its Collectors." In
A Comparative Study of Euro-American Ainu Collections
(in Japanese), ed. Yoshinobu Kotani. Nagoya:
Nagoya Daigaku.
Arai, Genjiro
1984 Ainu no sakebi (The cry of the Ainu). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
1990 Zoku Ainu no sakebi (The cry of the Ainu,
continued). Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan
Kikaku Senta.
1992 Ainu jinbutsuden (Ainu biographies). Ed. Kato
Yoshio. Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku
Senta.
Asaji, T., T. Miyatake, and K. Nakama
1993 Kindai Nihon to Ainu minzoku (Modern Japan and
the Ainu). Osaka: Osaka Jinken Rekishi
Shiryokan.
Atuy, Masanori Toyooka
1997 "Coexistence with Nature and the Third
Philosophy': Learning from the Spirit of the
Ainu." In Circumpolar Animism and Shamanism, ed.
Takako Yamada and Takashi Irimoto, 3-8.
Sapporo: Hokkaido Daigaku.

1989 Kodama shiiyo mokuroku I (The Kodama collection
catalogue, vol. I). Shiraoi: Ainu Minzoku
Hakubutsukan.

Baba, Osamu
1939 "The Northern Kurile Islands as Seen from
Archaeology." Reprinted in Archaeology and
Ethnology of Sakhalin and the Kuriles (Dr. O. Baba's
Collected Papers, vol. 3) (in Japanese), 9-162.
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta, 1979.

1991

1971

Kodama shiiyo mokuroku II (The Kodama collection
catalogue, vol. 2). Shiraoi: Ainu Minzoku
Hakubutsukan.

1993 Ainu bunka no kisochishiki (Principles of Ainu
culture). Shiraoi: Sofukan
Akimichi, Tornoya
1984 Kujira to hito to sono setsuwa (Whales, men, and
their stories). Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
1994 Kujira to hito no minzokushi (Ethnography of whales
and men). Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
Alekseev, Alexandr I.
1977 Il'ya Gavrilovich Voznesenskii. Moscow: Nauka.
Amino, Yoshihiko
1990 Nihonkai to hokkoku bunka (The Japan sea and
northern culture). Umi to retto bunka (Sea and
island culture, vol. 1). Tokyo: Shogakkan.
Anderson, Benedict R. O'G.
1991 Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism. 2nd ed. London and New
York: Verso.
Anuchin, Dmitrii N.
1 876 "Plemia Ainov: materialy po antropologii
Vostochnoi Azii" (Ainu tribe: Materials on
the anthropology of East Asia). Trudy
Antropologicheskogo Otdela Obsbestva Lubitelei
Estestvoznaniia, Antropologii i Etnografii 20, no. 2: 79-204.

"Ainu Folk Materials and I." In A Catalogue of a
Sakhalin Ainu Exhibition: The Baba Collection in
Hakodate City Museum (in Japanese). Hakodate:
Shiritsu Hakodate Hakubutsukan.

1979 A Journey of the Northern People (in Japanese). Sapporo.
Baelz, Erwin von
1883 "Die Korperlichen Eigenschaften der Japaner"
(The physical attributes of the Japanese).
Mitteilungen der Deutscben Gesellscbaft fiir Natur- und
Volkerkunde Ostasiens 3: 330-59.
1900 "Uber die Rassenelemente in Ostasien, speciell
in Japan" (On racial elements in East Asia,
particularly Japan). Mitteilungen der Deutscben
Gesellscbaft fiir Natur- und Volkerkunde Ostasiens 8,
no. 2: 227-35
Batchelor, John
1887 "Grammar of the Ainu Language." In The
Language, Mythology, and Geographical Nomenclature
of Japan Viewed in the Light of Ainu Studies, ed. Basil
Hall Chamberlain. Tokyo: Imperial University
Liberal Arts School.
1889 An Ainu-Englisb-Japanese Dictionary and Grammar.
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
1892 The Ainu of Japan. London: The Religious Tract
Society.
1901

The Ainu and Their Folklore. London: The Religious
Tract Society.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
393

1902 The Ainu of Japan: The Religion, Superstitions, and
General History of the Hairy Aborigines of JapanNew York: Fleming H. Revel Co.

1905 An Ainu-English-Japanese Dictionary. 2nd ed.
Tokyo: Methodist Publishing House.
1924 (ed. and trans.) "Pakoro Kamuy chikappo
oaishpe" (About the little bird of smallpox). In
Uepekere (Ainu fireside stories). Tokyo: Kyobunkan.

1985 Kapuron nisshi: Ezo to Edo (Journal of Horace
Capron: Expedition to Japan 1871-1875).
Trans. Teruo Nishijima. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Shinbunsha.
Chamberlain, Basil Hall
1887a "An Aino Bear Hunt.” Transactions of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Japan 15: 12-130.

Studies. Memoirs of the Literature College,
Tokyo Imperial University, series 1. Tokyo:
Imperial University Liberal Arts School.

1887c "A Catalogue of Books Relating to Yezo and
the Ainos." In The Language, Mythology, and
Geographical Nomenclature of Japan Viewed in the
Light of Aino Studies, ed. Basil Hall Chamberlain,

137-74. Memoirs of the Literature College,
Tokyo Imperial University, series I. Tokyo:
Imperial University Liberal Arts School

1938 Ainu Eiwa jiten (Ainu-English-Japanese
Dictionary.) 4th ed. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten

1888 Ainu Folktales London: Folklore Society.

Befu, Harumi, and Chester S. Chard
1964 "A Prehistoric Maritime Culture of Okhotsk
Sea." American Antiquity 30, no. 1: 1-19.
Bickmore, Albert S.
1868 The Ainos, or Hairy Men of Yesso. The Ainos,
or Hairy Men of Saghalin and the Kurile
Islands. The American Journal of Science and Arts
45: 353-361,- 361-377.
Bird, Isabella
1881 Unbeaten Tracks in Japan. New York: G. P.
Putnam's Sons. Reprint, Rutland, Vt., and
Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Co., Inc., 1973.
Black, Lydia
1973 "The Nivkh (Cilyak) of Sakhalin and the Lower
Amur." Arctic Anthropology 10, no. L 1-110.

Chard, Chester S.
1974 Northeast Asia in Prehistory. Madison: University of
Wisconsin.
Chaussonnet, Valerie
1995 Crossroads Alaska. Native Cultures of Alaska and
Siberia. Washington, DC: Arctic Studies
Center, National Museum of Natural History,
Smithsonian Institution. Russian edition ed, and
trans. Igor Krupnik, 1996.

1947 "Osnovnye napravleniia rasovoi differentsiatsii v
Vostochnoi Azii" (The main directions of racial
differentiation in East Asia). Trudy Instituta
Etnografii Akademiia Nauk SSSR 2.

1951

1905 "The Jesup North Pacific Expedition."
Proceedings of the International Congress of

Brauns, David
1883 "Ainos of Japan." Science 2, no. 26: 134.
Breitbart, Eric
1997 A World on Display: Photographs from the St. Louis
World's Fair, 1904. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press.
Brooks, Charles Wolcott
1876 "Report of Japanese Vessels Wrecked in the
North Pacific Ocean, from Earliest Records to
the Present Time." Proceedings of the California
Academy of Sciences 6.

Broughton, William Robert
1804 A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean . . .
in the Years 1795, 1796, 1797, 1798. London: T.
Cadell and S. W. Davies.
Capron, Horace
1875 Reports and Official Letters to the Kaitakushi
[Hokkaido Colonial Office], [Tokyo]:
Kaitakushi

394

1976 Chiri Mashiho chosakushu. Btinrui Ainugo jiten,
shokubutsu to dobutsu hen (Collected works of
Mashiho Chiri: Classified dictionary of the Ainu
language [Supplement volume 1: Plants and
animals.]). Reprint, Tokyo: Heibonsha.
1986

Wajin wa fune o kit (Wajin eat boats). Sapporo:

Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
Chiri, Mashiho, and Kunio Oda
1956 Yukara kansho (Appreciation of the yukar).
Tokyo: Gengensha.
Chiri, Mutsumi, and Takao Yokoyama (eds.)
1995 Ainu minzoku shashin to kaiga shusei: Geijutsu (Ainu
photography and painting: Ainu art). Vol. 5.
Tokyo: Nihon Tosho Senta.
Chiri, Yukie

Trudy Instituta Etnografii Akademiia Nauk SSSR 16:

Chiyo, Hajime
1984a Zoku Jomon bunka (Jomon culture, vol. 2). Tokyo:
Nyu Saiensu Sha.

1928 Ainu shin'yoshu (Epic poetry of the Ainu). Tokyo:
Iwanami Shoten.

Chikap, Mieko
1989 "Long, Cold Winter: An Ainu Childhood
Recalled." Japan-Asia Quarterly Review (AA4PO)
20, no. 4,- 21, no. 1.

1984b Zofen Jomon jidai no seikatsu yoshiki (Jomon lifestyle,
vol. 2). Tokyo: Nyu Saiensu Sha.

Chiri, Mashiho
1942 Ainu goho kenkyit: Karafuto hogen o cbusbintosbite
(Research on Ainu grammar: With reference to
Sakhalin dialect). Tokyo: Gengensha.

Chubarova, Rimma V.
1957 "K istorii drevneishego naseleniia o-va
Sakhalina" (About the history of the most
ancient population of Sakhalin Island). Sovetskaia
Elnografiia 4: 60-75.

Americanists (New York, 1902): 91-100.

Brace, C. Loring, and K. D. Hunt
1990 "A Nonracial Craniofacial Perspective on
Human Variation: A(ustralia) to Z(uni)." American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 82: 341-60.

1974b Chiri Mashiho chosakushu: Btinrui Ainugo jiten, ningen
hen (Collected works of Mashiho Chiri: Classi¬
fied dictionary of the Ainu language [Supple¬
ment volume II: Human beings]). Reprint,
Tokyo: Heibonsha.

"Osnovnye prinzipy antropologicheskikh
klassifikatsii" (The main directions of
anthropological classification). Proiskhozhdenie
Cheloveka i Drawer Rasselenie Chelovechestva,

Boas, Franz

1903 "The Jesup North Pacific Expedition." American
Museum Journal 3, no. 5: 72-119.

1974a Chiri Mashiho chosakushu. Ainugo kenkyuhen
(Collected works of Mashiho Chiri: Ainu
language study). Vol. 4. Reprint, Tokyo:
Heibonsha.

Cheboksarov, Nikolai Nikolaevich

291-322.
1894 "Chinook Texts." In Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin 20. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution.

In Chiri Mashiho chosakushu . Setsuwa to shin'yo hen

(Collected works of Mashiho Chirr Narratives and
mythologies). Vol. 2. Reprint, Tokyo: Heibonsha.

Nomenclature of Japan Viewed in the Light of Aino

1927 Ainu Life and Lore: Echoes of a Departing Race.
Tokyo: Kyobunkan. Reprint, New York:
Johnson Reprint Corp., 1971.

Batchelor, John, and Kingo Miyabe
1893 Ainu Economic Plants. Transactions of the Asiatic
Society of Japan, vol. 21. Yokohama: Asiatic
Society of Japan.

I973d"jushi to kawauso" (Magicians and otters).

1 887b (ed.) The Language, Mythology and Geographical

1925 Ainujin to sono setsuwa (The Ainu people and
their folktales). Sapporo: Tokido Shobo.
1926 Ainu Eiwa jiten (Ainu-English-Japanese
dictionary). 3rd ed. (with grammar, EnglishAinu vocabulary). Tokyo: Kyobunkan.

1973c Chiri Mashiho chosakushu. Seikatsushi to minzokushi
(Collected works of Mashiho Chiri: Ethnology
and ethnography). Vol. 3. Reprint, Tokyo:
Heibonsha.

1953 Btinrui Ainugo jiten (Classified dictionary of the
Ainu). 3 vols. Tokyo: Nihon Jomin Bunka Kenkyu.
1954 "Yukara no hitobito to sono seikatsu 2"
(People of yukar and their lives, no. 2).
Historians 3: 33-61.
1955 Ainu bungaku (Ainu literature). Tokyo:
Gengensha.
1957 "Ainugo no tokushugo ni tsuite" (Special words
in the Ainu language). Hoppo Bunka Kenkyu
Hokoku 12.

1960 Ainu ni densho sareru kabu shikyoku ni kansuru chosa
kenkyu (Study of traditional song, dance, and music
of the Ainu). Hokkaido: Bunkazai Hogo linkai
1964 "Ainugo to Nihongo no kankei" (Relations
between Ainu and Japanese). In The World
Encyclopedia. Tokyo: Heibonsha.
1973a Chiri Mashiho chosakushu: Setsuwa to shin'yo hen
(Collected works of Mashiho Chiri: Narratives
and mythologies). Vol. I. Reprint, Tokyo:
Heibonsha.
1973b Chiri Mashiho chosakushu: Setsuwa to shin'yo hen
(Collected works of Mashiho Chin: Narratives and
mythologies). Vol. 2. Reprint, Tokyo: Heibonsha.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cole, Fay-Cooper
1934 "Frederick Starr." American Anthropologist 36: 271.
Cornell, James B.
1964 "Ainu Assimilation and Cultural Extinction:
Acculturation Policy in Hokkaido." Ethnology 3,
no. 3: 287-304.
Crawford, Gary W.
1992 "The Transition to Agriculture in Japan." In
Transitions to Agriculture in Prehistory, ed. Anne
Birgitte Gebauer and T. Douglas Price, 117-32.
Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press.
Crawford, Gary W., and Masakazu Yoshizaki
1987 "Ainu Ancestors and Prehistoric Asian Agri¬
culture." Journal of Archaeological Science 14: 201-13.
Crawford, Gary W., and Hiroto Takamiya
1990 "The Origins and Implications of Late
Prehistoric Plant Husbandry in Northern Japan."
Antiejuity 64: 889-91 1.
Crosby, Alfred
1986 Ecological Imperialism. The Biological Expansion of
Europe, 900-1900. Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Crowell, Aron L.
1988 "Prehistory of Alaska's Pacific Coast In
Crossroads of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and Alaska,
ed. William W, Fitzhugh and Aron L. Crowell,
130-40. Washington, D C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Culin, Stewart
1909 "Report on a collecting trip in China and Japan
(June 1909 to March 1910). Washington, D C.,
Llkiah, Tokyo,- Yokohama; Sendai, Nikko,Shanghai, FJong Kong,- Canton, London,
Porno." Culin Archive Collection Manuscript.
Brooklyn Museum of Art Archives,
1912 "Report on a collecting trip in Japan, including a
visit to the Kurile Islands and FJokkaido (May
1912-January 1913). Yokohama, Tokyo, Shana,
Sapporo,- Sendai, Shiraoi, Kyoto, Victoria,
Ukiah, Los Angeles,- Chicago, Ainu, Porno."
Culin Archive Collection Manuscript. Brooklyn
Museum of Art Archives.
Dalby, Liza C.
1993 Kimono Fashioning Culture. New Haven, Conn :
Yale LIniversity Press.
Dali, William Healy
1878 On the Remains of Later Pre-bistoric Man Obtained from
Caves in the Catherina Archipelago, Alaska Territory,
and Especially from the Caves of the Aleutian Islands,
318. Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge,
vol. 22, art. 6. Washington, DC.: Smithsonian
Institution.
Damas, David
1984 Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 5. Arctic
Washington, D C. Smithsonian Institution
Danilov, Victor J.
1990 America's Science Museums. New York: Greenwood
Press.

Dettmer, Hans A.
1989 Ainu Grammatik (Ainu grammar). 2 vols
-97 Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
1993 "Einige Bemerkungen zur Grammatik der Ainu:
Zu den Anfangen der wissenschaftlichen
Beschaftigung mit der Ainu Sprache" (Notes on
Ainu grammar: The beginnings of the scholarly
pursuit of the Ainu language). In European Studies
on Ainu Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner,
81-90. Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen
Institut fur Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-vonSiebold-Stiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
Diamond, Jared
1998 "Japanese Roots." Discover Online 19, no. 6 1-13.
Dikov, Nikolai Nikolaevich
1968 "The Discovery of the Paleolithic in Kamchatka
and the Problem of the Initial Occupation of
America." Arctic Anthropology 5, no. 1 191-203.
1993 Aziia po styke s Amerikoi v Drevnosti (Asia at the
juncture with America in antiquity). St.
Petersburg: Nauka Reprint in English, trans.
R L. Bland, Anchorage: National Park Service,
Beringia Program, 1997.
Dikova, Tamara M
1983 Arkbeologiya Yuzbnoi Kamchatki v Svyazi s Problemoi
Rasseleniya Ainov (Archaeology of Southern
Kamchatka with regard to the issue of the early
settlement of the Ainu). Moscow: Nauka.
Dobrotvorskii, Mikhail M
1873 "O Russkoi narodnoi meditsine sravnitel'no s
narodnoi meditsinoi Sakhahnskih Ainov"
(Comparison of Russian folk medicine with
the folk medicine of the Sakhalin Ainu). Zapiski
vracheig Kazani (Writings on Kazan), Kazan:
Universitetskaia Tipografiia.
1 875 Ainsko-Russkii Slovar (Ainu-Russian dictionary).
Kazan Llniversitetskaia Tipografiia.

Davis, Bernhard J.
1870 "Description of the Skeleton of an Ainu Woman
and Three Skulls of the Same Race." In Memoirs
Read before the Anthropological Society of London, vol.
3, 21-40. London: Trubner and Co.

Dodo, Yukio, and Hajime Ishida
1990 "Population History of Japan as Viewed from
Cranial Nonmetric Variation" (in Japanese).
Jinruigaku Zasshi 98: 269-87.

Dean, Bashford
1901 "Catalogue of Amo Collection." Manuscript
American Museum of Natural History.
New York.

Dubreuil, Chisato O
1995 "The Life and Art of Bikky Sunazawa: A
Contemporary Ainu Sculptor" Master's thesis,
LIniversity of Washington.

Debets, Georgii F.
1935 "Retsenziia na: E. F. Eickstedt, Rassenkunde und
Rassengeschichte der Menschheil" (Review of Human
Ethnology and Culture by E. F. Eickstedt).
Antropologicheskii Zhumal, no. 1.

Dybowski, Benedykt
1892 (comp.) Sloumik narzecza Ainou) zamieszkujacych
wyspe Szumszu (Dictionary of the Ainu language).
Ed. Ignacy Radlinski. Slowniki narzecza Ludow
Kamczackich (Dictionaries of the Kamchatkan
People's Language, vol. 1). Krakow: Rozprawy
Akademu Umejetnosci, Wydzial Filologiczny.

1951

"Antropologicheskie issledovaniia v
Kamchatskoi Oblasti" (Anthropological
research in Kamchatka province). Trudy Instituta
Etnografii Akademiia Nauk SSSR 17.

Derevianko, Anatoli P., and Vitalii E. Medvedev
1993 Issledovanie Poseleniia Gasia (Investigations at the
Gasia site). Novosibirsk: Institut Istorii,
Literaturi, u Kulturii Akadenna Nauk
Deriha, Koji
1991 (ed.) An Exhibition of Materials on Northern Peoples
Stored in the Historical Museum of Hokkaido (in
Japanese). Sapporo: Hokkaido Kaitaku
Kinenkan
1995 "Ainu Culture: Hunting, Trade, and Religion In
The Ainu People of Today. Art and Life of the Ainu, ed
Philip H. R. Stepny, 17-22. Edmonton: The
Provincial Museum of Alberta.
1997 "Notes on Changes in Ainu Society in Modern
Japan Based on Comparisons of U.S.-Japan Ainu
Collections." In A Comparative Study of EuroAmerican Ainu Collections, ed. Yoshinobu Kotani.
Nagoya: Nagoya Daigaku.

Echizen, Toshiya
1988 "Ki no sakka o tazunete" (Visiting the wood
sculptor). Hyoka 19, no. 6.
1992 "Dohoku no bijutsu IF Sunazawa Bikky no Nitnekamuy" (Art of northern Hokkaido IF Bikky
Sunazawa's Nitne-kamuy). Hyoka 30, no. 4-5.
1993a "Dohoku no bijutsu 11 Sunazawa Bikky no Nitnekamuy'1 (Art of northern Hokkaido IF Bikky
Sunazawa's Nitne-kamuy). Hyoka 31, no. 4—5.
1993b "Sunazawa Bikky: Sono zenki no katsudo ni
tsuite" (Bikky Sunazawa: His early artistic activity).
Hok-kaido Art Museum Studies Qune): 29-35.
Eganti, Nantio (ed.)
1982 Sbinpojiumu: Ainu to kodai Nihon (Symposium: The
Ainu and ancient Japan). Tokyo: Shogakukan.
Eickstedt, Egon, Freiherr von
1934 Rassenkunde und Rassengeschichte der Menscbbeit
(Human ethnology and culture). Stuttgart:
F. Enke.

Eldridge, Stuart
1876 "On the Arrow Poison in Use among the Ainos
of Yezo." Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of
Japan 4.
Eliade, Mircea
1964 Shamanism: Archaic Technigues of Ecstasy. Trans.
Willard R. Trask. Bollingen Series 76. New York:
Bollingen Foundation, dist. Pantheon Books.
Emori, Susumu
1987 Aimt no rekishi: Hokkaido no hitobito 2 (A history of
the Ainu: The people of Hokkaido, vol. 2).
Tokyo: Sanseido
Evans, Nancy L.
1991 "Frederick Starr." In International Dictionary of
Anthropologists, 664-65. New York: Garland
Publishing.
Fagan, Brian M
1990 The Journey From Eden: The Peopling of Our World.
New York: Thames and Hudson.
Fane, Diana, Ira Jacknis, and Lise M. Breen (eds.)
1991 Objects of Myth and Memory American Indian Art at the
Brooklyn Museum Brooklyn: The Brooklyn
Museum in association with the University of
Washington Press.
Fitzhugh, William W.
1988 "Comparative Art of the North Pacific Rim." In
Crossroads of Continents. Cultures of Siberia and Alaska,
ed. William W. Fitzhugh and Aron L Crowell,
294-312. Washington, D C.: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
1993 "Art and Iconography in the Hunting Ritual of
North Pacific Peoples." In Proceedings of the 7th
International Abasbiri Symposium, 1-13. Abashirt
Hokkaidoritsu Hoppo Minzoku Hakubutsukan
Fitzhugh, William W., and Valerie Chaussonnet (eds.)
1994 Anthropology of the North Pacific Rim. Washington,
D C : Smithsonian Institution Press
Fitzhugh, William W., and Aron L. Crowell (eds.)
1988 Crossroads of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and Alaska.
Washington, D C Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Forrer, Matthi
1996 "The Leiden Collections of Philipp Franz von
Siebold " In Die Japansammlungen Philipp Franz und
Heinrich von Siebold zum Katalog der Siebold Ausstellung
1966 (The Japanese collection of Philipp Franz and
Heinrich von Siebold from the Siebold catalogue,
1966). Tokyo Deutschen Institut fur Japanstudien
der Philipp-Franz-von-Siebold-Stiftung,
Friese, Eberhard
1984 "Das Deutsche Japanbild 1944 Bemerkungen
zum Problem der auswartigen Kulturpolitik
wahrend des Nationalsozialismus" (The German
view of Japan in 1944: Observations on the
problem of foreign cultural politics during
National Socialism). In Deutschland, Japan
Historiscbe Kontakte (Germany, Japan: Foreign
contact), ed. Josef Kreiner. Studium Universale
3. Bonn: Bouvier.
Fujimoto, Tsuyoshi
1979 Hokuben no iseki (Northern archaeological sites).
Tokyo: Kyoikusha.
Fujimura, Hisakazu
1976 Hokkaidoshi kenkyu (A study of Hokkaido history).
Sapporo: Hokkaidoshi Kenkyukai.
1977 "Minzoku chosa noto: Shiraoichiho no kanshu"
(Ethnological research, no. 4: The customs in the
Shiraoi region). Hokkaidoshi Kenkyu 12: 89-91.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
395

1982 Ainu no rei no sekai (The spirit world of the Ainu).
Tokyo: Shogakukan.
1985a "Ainu kogei no kami to kokoro" (The gods and the soul
of Ainu arts and crafts). Menomin, no. 104: 17-24.
1985b Amu Kami-gami to tomo ni ikirtt bitobito (Ainu
People with the gods). Tokyo: Fukutake Shoten.
Fukao, Katsuko, and Katsuaki Kitayama
1986 "Mokuyo puraza: 'shiki' o horu" (Thursday
Plaza: Carving 'Four Seasons'). Hokkaido Sbimbiin,
23 January.
Fukuyama, Jun'ichi
1943 Hogeikai no senkakusha Gomi Shinbei (The pioneer of
whale hunting, Gomi Shinbei). Osaka: Nippon
Shuppansha.
Furuhata, Tanemoto
1962 Ketsuekigata no hanashi (Blood-group polymor¬
phisms). Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Ciddings, J. Louis
1964 The Archaeology of Cape Denbigh Providence, R I
Brown University Press.
Gjerdman, Olaf
1959 "The Ainu Language: A Contribution." In Origins
of the Ainu Language: The Ainu—Indo-European
Controversy, vol. 3. Ed Kirsten Refsing.
Richmond, England: Curzon Press, Oxford
Llniversity Press, 1998.
Cleeson, Paul, and Gerald Grosso
1976 "Ozette " In The Excavation of Water-Saturated
Archaeological Sites, Wet Sites, on the Northwest Coast
of North America, ed. Dale R Croes, 13-44.
National Museum of Man Mercury Series,
Archaeological Survey of Canada, no. 50.
Ottawa: National Museum of Man.
Golder, Frank Alfred
1914 Russian Expansion on the Pacific, 1641-1850. . .
Cleveland: Arthur FL Clark Co.
Gonai, Mitsuru, and Masaru Wakabayashi
1972 Asbita ni mukatte (Toward the future). Tokyo:
Maki Shoten
Graburn, Nelson H. H. (ed.)
1976 Ethnic and Tourist Arts Cultural Expressions from the
Fourth World. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Griffis, William Elliot
1 876 The Mikado's Empire. New York: Harper.
Habara, Yukichi
1939 Ainu shakai keizaishi (Ainu social-economic history).
Tokyo: Hakuyosha.
Haguenauer, Charles
1956 Origines de la civilisation Japonaise: Introduction a
I'e'tude de la prehistoire du Japon (Origins of the
Japanese civilization: Introduction to the study
of the prehistory of Japan). Paris: Impr.
nationale.
Hallowell, A Irving
1926 "Bear Ceremonialism in the Northern
Hemisphere." American Anthropologist 28. 1-173.
Hanihara, Kazuro
1964 "On the Ainu Study" (in Japanese). Bulletin of
Hokkaido Local Studies L 1-4.
1970 "Mongoloid Dental Complex in the Deciduous
Dentition with Special Reference to the
Dentition of the Ainu ." Jinruigaku Zasshi 78: 3—17.
1979 "Dental Traits in Ainu, Australian Aborigines,
and New World Populations." In The First
Americans, Origins, Affinities, and Adaptations, ed.
William S. Laughlin and Albert B. Harper, 125—
34. New York: G. Fischer

Hanstein, Otfried von
1921 Von Tokyo zti den Waldmenscken von Yezo (From
Tokyo to the forest-dwellers of Yezo).
Reiserzahlungen aus dem Fernen Osten 5
(Travel tales from the Far East 5). Leipzig: Fock.
Harrison, John A
1954 "The Saghalien Trade: A Contribution to Ainu
Studies." Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 10:
278-93.
Hariu, Ichiro et al.
1989 SunaZawa Bikky sakuhinshu (Bikky Sunazawa's
artworks). Tokyo: Yobisha.
Hasebe, Kazuhiro
1977 "Hokkaido Settlement Mission and Specimens:
Genealogy of Artifacts of Northern People
Housed in Hakodate City Museum." In A
Catalogue of a Special Exhibition: The Meiji Restoration
in Hakodate (in Japanese). Hakodate: Hakodate
Shiritsu Hakubutsukan
1992 "A Study of the Baba Collection: On the
Ethnological Materials" (in Japanese). Kiko
Shiritsu Hakodate Hakubutsukan 2.
Hasebe, Kotondo
1949 Gensbijidai Nihon minzokti no seiritsu (The origins
of the Japanese). Tokyo: Chuokoronsha.
Hattori, Shiro
1955 "Ainugo to Nihongo no kankei" (Linguistic
relationships between the Ainu and Japanese
languages). Asabi Sbimbun Reprint, Hokkaido
Shimbun, 3 February 1961.
1957 "Ainugo no kenkyu ni tsuite" (About Ainu
language studies). Kokoro no Hana 700.
1959 Nihongo no keito (Affinity of Ainu language).
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
1960 "A lexicostatistical study of Ainu dialects." The
Japan [sic] Journal of Ethnology 24, no. 4: 31-66.
1964 Ainugo bogenjiten (Ainu dialect dictionary).
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
Hauge, Victor, and Takako Hauge
1978 Folk Traditions in Japanese Art. Tokyo and New York:
Kodansha International in association with the
International Exhibitions Foundation and the
Japan Foundation, dist. Harper and Row.
Hayashi, Yoshishige
1975 Aim no noko bttnka (Agriculture of the Ainu).
Tokyo: Keiyusha.
Higuchi, Kenji
1987 "Kamera man nikki: Kita no daichi o horitsuzukeru, Sunazawa Bikky-san" (A Diary of the
photographer: Mr. Bikky Sunazawa digs northern
land). Gekkan Shakaito (December): 192-99.
Hilger, M. Inez
1967 "Japan’s 'Sky People' The Vanishing Ainu."
National Geographic 131, no. 2: 268-96.
1971

Together with the Ainu: A Vanishing People. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press.

Hiller, Hiram M.
1895-Journals, correspondence, and manuscript on
1907 the Ainu. Furness, Harrison, Hiller Expeditions.
University of Pennsylvania Museum Archives.
Hiramura, Yukio
1930 "Ainu to shite ikiru ka, mata Shamo ni doka
suru ka" (Do we live as Ainu or assimilate to
Japanese?). Ezo no Hikari, no. 1.

1991 "Dual Structure Model for the Population History
of the Japanese." Japan Review 2. 1-33.

Hitchcock, Romyn
1890 "A Queer People: They Live in the Kuriles
and Northern Japan." Evening Star (Washington,
D C.), 15 March.

396

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1891a “The Ancient Pit-dwellers of Yezo." In United
States National Museum Annual Report for 1889-1890,
417-27. Washington, D C. U S. Government
Printing Office.
189lb "The Ainos of Yezo, Japan." In United States
National Museum Annual Report for 1889-1890, 428502. Washington, D C.: U S. Government
Printing Office.
Hoffeker, John F., Roger W. Power, and Ted Goebel
1993 "The Colonization of Beringia and the New
World." Science 259. 46-53.
Hokkaido
1975 Shin Hokkaido-shi (The history of Hokkaido, vol.
6). Sapporo: Dokyodo Kikakutai.
Hokkaido-cho
1934 Hokkaido Kyudojin Hogo Ho enkaku shi (The history
of the Hokkaido Former Natives Protection
Act). Sapporo: Hokkaido-cho.
Hokkaido Kyoiku linkai
1968 Ainu minzoku bunkazai chosa bokokusbo (Report on
the research of Ainu cultural artifacts). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Kyoiku linkai. Updated eds. 1992,
1995.
Hokkaido Maizo Bunkazai Senta
1994 Isekiga kataru Hokkaido no rekishi (The history of
Hokkaido based on the findings from
archaeological sites). Sapporo: Hokkaido
Maizo Bunkazai Senta.
Hokkaido Minseibu
1972, 1979, 1986 Hokkaido Utari jittai chosa hokokusho
(Report of the survey of socioeconomic
conditions of the Ainu). Sapporo: Hokkaido
Minseibu.
Hokkaido Seikatsu Fukushibu
1993 Hokkaido Utari jittai chosa hokokusho (Report of the
survey of socioeconomic conditions of the
Ainu). Sapporo: Hokkaido Seikatsu Fukushibu.
Hokkaido Utari Kyokai
1994a Pirika noka (Traditional patterns: The heart of
the Ainu culture). Sapporo: Hokkaido Utari
Kyokai.
1994b Akor itak: Ainugo tekisuto (Our language: Ainu
language text, vol. 1). Sapporo: Kuruzu.
Honda, Mitsugu
1995 Hokkaido chimei kanjikai (Dictionary of Hokkaido
place-names). Sapporo: Hokkaido Shinbunsha.
Horai, S., R. Kondo, K. Murayama, S. Hayashi,
H. Koike, and N. Nakai
1991 "Phylogenetic Affiliation of Ancient and
Contemporary Humans Inferred from
Mitochondrial DNA." Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London (Series B, Biological
Sciences) 333: 409-17.
Hough, Walter
1923 "Racial Groups and Figures in the Natural
History Building of the United States National
Museum.” In Smithsonian Institution Annual Report
for 1920, 61 1 — 14, 655-56; pi. 86. Washington,
D C.: U S. Government Printing Office.
Howell, David L.
1994 "Ainu Ethnicity and the Boundaries of the Early
Modem Japanese State." Past and Present, no. 142.
1995

Capitalism from Within: Economy, Society and the State
in a Japanese Fishery. Berkeley: University of
California Press.

1997 "The Meiji State and the Logic of Ainu
'Protection.'" In New Directions in the Study of Meiji
Japan, ed. Helen Hardacre with Adam L. Kern,
815-47. Leiden and New York: E. J. Brill.
Howells, William White
1959 Mankind in the Making: The Story of Human Evolution.
New York: Doubleday.

Huber, Gerhard
1964 Die Ainu. Ein Volk im Untergang (The Ainu: An
oppressed people). Fulda: Druckerei Kloster
Frauenberg.
Hyatt, Marshall
1990 Franz Boas, Social Activist. The Dynamics of Ethnicity.
New York: Greenwood Press.
Iboshi, Hokuto
1930 Kotan. Iboshi Hokuto iko (Kotan: The writings of
Hokuto Iboshi). Tokyo: Kibosha. Reprint, Tokyo:
Sofukan, 1984.
libe, Noriaki
1995 Ainu no gunzo-. Minzoku no hokori ni ikiru (Portrayal
of the Ainu: The proud race). Tokyo:
Ochanomizu Shobo.
Ikeya, Kazunobu
1997 "Bear Rituals of the Matagi and the Ainu in
Northeastern Japan." In Circumpolar Animism and
Shamanism, ed. Takako Yamada and Takashi
Irimoto, 55-63. Sapporo: Hokkaido Daigaku.

lwasaki, Naoko
1998 Nihon kinsei no Ainu shakai (Ainu society in modern
Japan). Tokyo: Azekura Shobo.
Izumi, Seiichi
1951 "Saru Ainu no chien shudan ni okeru iwor" (The
iuror and the territorial group of the Saru Ainu).
Minzokugaku Kenkyu 16, no. 3-4: 29-45.
Jochelson, Waldemar
1908 The Koryak Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural
History, vol. 10. Leiden: E. J. Brill, New York: G. E.
Stechert. Reprint, New York: AMS Press, 1975.
Joest, Wilhelm
1882 "Die Ainos auf der Insel Yesso." (The Ainu on the
island of Yezo). ZeitschriftfiirEthnologic 14: 180-92.
Kaiho, Mineo
1979 Kinsei no Hokkaido (Early-modern Hokkaido).
Tokyo: Kyoikusha.
1985 “Ezochi no Koeki" (Bartering in Ezo). Menomin,
no. 104: 25-29.

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(1CCPR)
1980, 1987, 1991, 1997 The Initial, Second, Third, and
Fourth Periodic Reports of Japan under Article 40
Paragraph i(h) of the InternationalCovenant on Civil
and Political Rights New York: United Nations.
Inukai, Tetsuo
1970 "Jujutsu, fujutsu" (Magic and shamanism). In
Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu, vol. 2),
ed. Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 61 333. Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.
Inukai, Tetsuo, and Takemitsu Natori
1969 “Shuryo" (Hunting and fishing). In Ainu
minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu, vol. 1), ed.
Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 321-66.
Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan
Irimoto, Takashi
1992a "Ainu Territoriality" (in Japanese). Hoppo Bunka
Kenkyu 21: 67-81.
1992b Ainu Bibliography. Sapporo: Hokkaido Daigaku.
1993 "Religion, Ecology, and Behavioral Strategy: A
Comparison of Ainu and Northern Athapaskan."
In Circumpolar Religion and Ecology. An Anthropology
of the North, ed. Takashi Irimoto and Takako
Yamada, 317-40. Tokyo: University of Tokyo
Press.
1997 "Ainu Shamanism: Oral Tradition, Healing, and
Dramas." In Circumpolar Animism and Shamanism,
ed. Takako Yamada and Takashi Irimoto, 21-46.
Sapporo: Hokkaido Daigaku
Ishijinia, Shinobu
1979 Mokucboguma (Bear woodcarvings). Sapporo:
Sapporo Kogeihin Kyokai.
1980a "Asahikawa chiho no miyagehin danposhi"
(The history of souvenirs in the Asahikawa
area). Flokkaido Mokucho Kogei Kyokai Kaiho, 1-6.
1980b "Hokkaido miyage no sanposhi" (The history of
Hokkaido souvenirs). In Hokkaido kanko miyage
(Hokkaido souvenirs), 3-6. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Kanko Miyage Kyokai.
198 1

Asahikawa no kibori guma no hanashi (The story of
bear woodcarvings in Asahikawa). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Kogei Kyokai.

Ishikawa, Motosuke
1957 "Ainu no torikabuto sidoku ni tsuite: Sono biryo
kagakuteki kenkyu" (On the aconite poison for
Ainu arrows: Microchemical studies). Jinruigaku
Zasshi 66: 16-27.
1962 "Ainu ga shuryo gyogyo ni shiyo si ta dokubutsu
ni tsuite" (Poisons used by the Ainu for hunting
and fishing). Jinruigaku Zasshi 69. 41-52.

1987 Chusei no Ezochi (Ezo of the Medieval period).
Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan.
Kaiho, Yoko
1992 Kindai hopposhi. Ainu minzoku to josei to (Modern
northern history. The Ainu and their women).
Tokyo: San'ichi Shobo
Kamigaki, Iwao
1988 Kindai seiji kankeisba nenpyo soran Senzen-hen
(Chronological biographies of modern political
figures, vol. 3: Prewar section). Tokyo: Yumani
Shobo.
Kannari, Matsu, and Kyosuke Kindaichi (eds.)
1961 Ainu jojishi: Yukaraushu (Ainu epics: Yukara). 9 vols.
Tokyo: Sanseido.
Kato, Kyuzo
1993 "Dawn of Russian Ethnology: Researchers and
Convicts around Bronislaw Pilsudski ' In European
Studies on Ainu Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner,
105-126. Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen
Institut fiir Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-vonSiebold-Stiftung. Munich: Iudicium-Verlag.
Kato, Kyuzo, and Yoshinobu Kotani (eds.)
1987 "Bronislaw Pilsudski's Materials on Northern
Peoples and Cultures." In Bulletin of the National
Museum of Ethnology, Special Issue 5 (in Japanese).
Osaka: Kokuritsu Minzokugaku Hakubutsukan.

Kendall, Laurel
1988 "Young Laufer on the Amur." In Crossroads of
Continents: Cultures of Siberia and Alaska, ed. William
W. Fitzhugh and Aron L. Crowell, 104.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
"Constructing Cultures Then and Now:
Celebrating Franz Boas and the Centennial of
the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 1897-1902.
Vol 1: Historical Perspectives." Anthropological
Papers of the American Museum of Natural History.
New York, forthcoming.
Kikuchi, Isao
1994 Ainu minzoku to Nihonjin (Ainu and the Japanese).
Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunsha.
Kikuchi, Tetsuo
1984 Hoppo kokogaku no kenkyu (Northern archaeol¬
ogy). Tokyo: Rokko Shuppan.
Kikuchi, Tetsuo, and Toyohiko Fukuda
1989 "Kita no chusei: Tsugaru/Hokkaido" (The medieval
period in the north: Tsugaru/ Hokkaido). In
Yomigaeru chusei (The revival of the medieval
period, vol. 4), ed. Yoshihiko Amino, Susumu lshii,
and Toyohiko Fukuda. Tokyo: Heibonsha.
Kikuchi, Toshihiko
1986 "Continental Culture and Hokkaido." In
Windows on the Japanese Past. Studies in Archaeology
and Prehistory, ed. Richard J. Pearson, 149-162.
Ann Arbor: Center for Japanese Studies,
University of Michigan.
1988 "Ainu shi to Satsumon bunka" (Ainu history and
Satsumon culture). In Kita kara no Nihon shi:
Hokkaido shinpojumu (A northern view of Japanese
history), ed. Hokkaido Tohokushi Kenkyukai,
261-78. Tokyo; Sanseido.
1995 Hokuto Ajia kodai bunka no kenkyu (The study of
ancient cultures in northeast Asia). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Daigaku.
Kimura, Hideaki
1997 Shiberia no kyusekki bunka (Siberian culture in the
Paleolithic era). Sapporo: Hokkaido Daigaku.
Kimura, Kenji
1983 Hokko nichiroku, 1793 (Diary of northern travels,
1793). Ed. Eisaku Yamazaki. Towada: Daiichi
Insatsu.
Kimura, Kunihiko
1962 "Ainu no shimon oyobi tenohiramon" (Fingerand palmprints of the Ainu). 2 Morph Anthrop 52:
176-98.

Kato, Shinpei
1985 Shiberia no senshi bunka to Nihon (Siberian pre-historic
culture and Japan). Tokyo: Rokko Shuppan.

Kindaichi, Kyosuke
1914 Kita Ezo koyo ihen (Epic poems of northern Ezo).
Tokyo: Kyodo Kenkyusha.

Kayano, Shigeru
1975 Ore no Nibutani (My Nibutani). Tokyo: Suzusawa
Shoten

1925 Ainu no kenkyu (Study of the Ainu). Tokyo:
Naigai Shobo

1978 Ainu no mingu (Ainu folk crafts). Tokyo: Suzusawa
Shoten.
1985 Kuma no katni no hanashi: Ainu no minwa (The romance
of the bear god: Ainu folktales). Tokyo: Taishukan
Shoten
1987 Ainu no sato Nibutani ni ikite (The heartland of
Ainu: My life in Nibutani). Sapporo: Hokkaido
Shinbunsha.
1988 Kamuy yukar to mukashi banashi/Kamuy yukar tura
uepekere (Kamuy yukar and uepekere). Tokyo:
Shogakkan.
1994 Our Land Was a Forest An Ainu Memoir Trans.
Kyoku Selden and Lili Selden. Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press.
1996 Kayano Shigeru no Ainugo jiten (Shigeru Kayano's
Ainu-language dictionary). Tokyo: Sanseido.

1926 "Kyukon densetsu yori Hagoromo Miwayama
densetsu e: Setsuwa ni ei jita Ainu dozoku no
ichimen" (From a legend of a suitor to a legend
of Hagoromo and Miwayama: An aspect of Ainu
ethnology in their legends). Minzoku 1: 1-44.
1927 "Gohojo kara mita Ainugo" (A linguistic study of
the Ainu language). Jinruigaku Zasshi 42: 411-29,
450-57
1931

Yukara no kenkyu: Ainu jojishi (A study of yukar.
The Ainu epics). Tokyo: Tokyo Bunko.

1932

Thoughts on Northern Tohoku (in Japanese).N.p.

1935 "Suji kara mita Ainu minzoku" (The Ainu and
their numeral system). In Ainugo kenkyu (Ainu
language study). N.p.: Nihon Bunkashi Ronsan.
1937 "Kokugo to Ainugo no kankei" (Linguistic
relationships between Japanese and Ainu
languages). In Ainugo kenkyu (Ainu language
study). N.p.: Nihon Bunkashi Ronsan.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
397

1942 Ainu jojishi. Yukara gaisetsu (Ainu epics: Outlines of
yukar). Tokyo: Seijisha.
1943 Ainu no sinlen (Ainu myths). Tokyo: Yashima
Shobo.
1944 Ainu no kenkyu (Research on the Ainu). 3rd ed.
Tokyo: Yashima Shobo.
1961

Ainu bunkashi: Kindaichi Kyosuke zenshu II (Ainu
cultural history: Selected papers of Kyosuke
Kindaichi II). Tokyo: Sanseido.

1993 Kindaicbi Kyosuke zensbu (Complete works of
Kyosuke Kindaichi). 15 vols. Tokyo: Sanseido.
Kindaichi, Kyosuke, and Sueo Sugiyanta
1941 Ainugeijutsu: Fukuso ben (Ainu art: Clothing).
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
1942 Ainugeijutsu: Mokko ben (Ainu art: Woodwork).
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
1943 Ainu geijutsii: Kinko/sbikki ben (Ainu art: Metalwork
and lacquerware). Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan
Kikaku Senta.
Kitagamae, Yasuo
1983 1643-nen Ainu sbakai tanboki. Furisu Sentai kokai kiroku
(The report of the Ainu in 1643: The voyage
logs of Vries Fleet). Tokyo: Yuzankaku.
1985 Ainu-jin to sono bunka: Meiji chuki no Ainu no mum
kara (The Ainu and their culture: Ainu villages of
the mid-Meiji period). Tokyo: Rokko Shuppan
1991

Kodai Emishi no kenkyu (Studies on the ancient
Fmishi.) Tokyo: Yuzankaku

Kitagawa, Joseph M
1961 "The Ainu bear festival: Iyomante." History of
Religions 1, no. 1: 95-151.
Kiyono, Kenji
1946 Nihon minzoku seiseiron (Formation of Japanese
ethnicity.) Tokyo: Nihon Hyoronsha.
1949 Kodai jinkotsu no kenkyu ni motozuku Nihon jinshuron
(Origins of the Japanese based on studies of
ancient skeletal remains). Tokyo: Iwanami
Shoten.
1955 Nihon kokogaku jinruigakushi (History of Japanese
archaeology and anthropology). Tokyo: Iwanami
Shoten,
Kodama, Mari
1985 "Ainu mon'yo" (Ainu design motifs.) Menomin, no
104: 30-35.
1987 "Yosoou" (Dressing up). In Ainu bunka no kiso
chisbiki (A fundamental knowledge of the Ainu
culture), ed. Michiaki Okada et al., 68-87.
Shiraoi: Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan.
1989 "My Father and Ainu Materials" (in Japanese).
In Kodama sbiryo mokuroku (A catalog of the
Kodama Collection 1). Shiraoi: Ainu Minzoku
Hakubutsukan.
Kodama, Sakuzaemon
1968 Ainu fukushoku no cbosa (A study of Ainu clothing)
Sapporo: Hokkaido Kyoiku linkai.
1969 "An Urgent Study on the Ainu" (in Japanese).
Karada no Kagaku 26.
1970a "Ikuji, meimei, kyoiku, seijin" (Childcare,
naming, education, and becoming an adult).
In Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu), ed.
Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 466-75.
Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.
1970b "Ainu no bunshin" (Ainu tattoos). In Ainu
minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu), ed. Ainu
Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 131-39. Tokyo:
Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.

1970d"Ifuku no fuzokuhin" (Accessories to wear). In
Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu), ed.
Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 270-315.
Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.
I970e "Ainu kenkyushi" (History of Ainu studies). In
Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology of the Ainu), ed.
Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 26-34.
Tokyo. Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.
1971

"Kinkyu o yoshita Ainu kenkyu" (Urgent need
for Ainu studies). Hokkaido no Bunka, no. 21.

1972 “Ainu no bunpu to jinko” (The distribution and dem¬
ography of the Ainu). In Ainu minzokushi (Ethnology
of the Ainu), ed. Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku
Kyogikai, 3-35. Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan
Koganei, Yoshikiyo
1893 "Beitrage zur physischen Anthropologie der
Aino. I. Untersuchungen am Skelet"
(Contributions to the physical anthropology of
the Aino. I Investigations of the skeleton).
Mittheil med Fakultet Universitat 2 1-249
Kokuritsu Minzokugaku Hakubutsukan
1991 Guide to the National Museum of Ethnology. Osaka:
Kokuritsu Minzokugaku Hakubutsukan.
1993 Minzogaku no senkakusha Torii Ryuzo no mita Ajia
(Ethnological collections from east Asia
gathered by Ryuzo Torii). Osaka: Kokuritsu
Minzogaku Hakubutsukan.
Kono, Hiromichi
1933a "Ainu no kike usi-pasuy: Ainu no inaw kenkyu"
(On kike-usi-pasuy, a mustache-lifter used by the
Ainu). Jinruigaku Zasshi 49, no. 5: 365-75.
1933b "Inaw gairon" (Introduction to inaw). Yagawa
Shiryo, no. 18.
1935 "Kaizuka jinkotsu no nazo to Ainu no
iyomante" (The mystery of human skeletons
from shell mounds in Japan and iyomante of the
Ainu). Jinruigaku Zasshi 50, no. 4: 151-60.
1958 Ainu nogeijutsu (Ainu art). Sapporo: N.p.
Kono, Motomichi
1978 Catalogue of the Asahikawa Museum VI. Asahikawa:
Shiritsu Asahikawa Kyodo Hakubutsukan.
1979 Hoppo no mingu (The material culture of the north).
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
1980 Catalogue of the Asahikawa Museum VIII.
Asahikawa: Shiritsu Asahikawa Kyodo
Hakubutsukan.
1985 "Ainu no kogei" (Ainu arts and crafts). Menomin
no, 104: 10-16.
1996 Ainu shigaisetsu (Outline of Ainu history).
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.
Kopernicki, Izydor
1882 "O Koschiach 1 Czaszkach Ajnosow" (On
bones and skulls of the Ainu). Pamietnik Akademii
Umiejetnosci w Krakowie 1 2: 27-68.
Koppers, Wilhelm
1938 "Kunstlicher Zahnschliff am Baren im Altpalaolithikum und bei den Ainu auf Sachalin" (Artistic
cutting of bear teeth in the old Paleolithic and
amongst the Ainu on Sakhalin). Quartar 1: 97-103.
Kotani, Yoshinobu
1993a "Ainu Collections in North America: History
and Interpretation." Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Association for Asian
Studies, Boston, Mass., March
1993b (ed.) Zaibei Ainu kankei shiryo no minzokugakuteki
kenkyu (Ethnological study of Ainu materials in
North American museums). Nagoya: Nagoya
Daigaku

1970c Ainu Historical and Anthropological Studies Hokkaido
University Medical Library Series, vol. 3. Sapporo:
Hokkaido University School of Medicine.

1994 Ethnological study of Frederick Starr's Ainu collections
(in Japanese). Nagoya: Nagoya Daigaku.

398

B 1 BLIOGRAPHY

1997 (ed.) A Comparative study of Euro-American Ainu
Collections. Nagoya: Nagoya Daigaku.
Kotani, Yoshinobu, and Josef Kreiner (eds.)
1993 Ainu no kogei (Ainu arts and crafts) Tokyo:
Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan.
Koya, Yoshio
1937 Rassenkunde der Ainu (The ethnology of the Ainu).
Tokyo: Japanische Gesellschaft zur Forderung
der Wissenschaftlichen Forschungen.
Koyama, Shuzo
1978 "Jomon subsistence and population" (in
Japanese). Senri Ethnological Studies 2: 1-65.
Kozintsev, Alexander G.
1993 "Ainu Origins in the Light of Modern Physical
Anthropology." Homo 44, no 2: 105-27.
Kozyreva, Rimma Vasil'evna
1967 Drevnii Sakhalin (Ancient Sakhalin). Leningrad:
Nauka, Leningrad otd-nie.
Krasheninnikov, Stepan Petrovich
1776 Opisanie Zemli Kamchatki (Explorations of Kam¬
chatka). St. Petersburg: Academy of Sciences.
Reprint, trans, E. A. P. Crownhart-Vaughan,
Portland: Oregon Historical Society, 1972.
Krauss, Michael E.
1988 "Many Tongues: Ancient Tales." In Crossroads
of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and Alaska, ed.
William W. Fitzhugh and Aron L. Crowell,
144-50 Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Kreiner, Josef
1981 Japan-Sammlungen in Museeti Mitteleuropas: Geschichte,
Aufbau und gegenwartige Probleme (Japanese
collections in Middle European museums:
History, development, and contemporary
problems). Bonn: Forderverein Bonner
Zeitschrift fiir Japanologie.
1987 "History and Current State of Ainu Collections
in European Museums." Bulletin of the National
Museum of Ethnology 5:417-5 3
1993 "European Images of Ainu and Ainu Studies in
Europe." In European Studies on Ainu Language and
Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 17-60. Monographien
6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fiir Japanstudien
der Philipp-Franz-von-Siebold-Stiftung.
Munich: Iudicium-Verlag.
1996 (ed.) Shiiboruto fusbi no mita Nihon/200 Jahre Siebold.Die Japan-sammlungen Philipp Franz und Heinrich
von Siebold (Two hundred years of Siebolds:
The Japanese collections of Philipp Franz and
Heinrich von Siebold). Tokyo: Deutsches
Institut for Japanstudien.
Kreiner, Josef, and Hans Dieter Olschleger
1987 A mil: Jager, Fischer und Sammler in Japans Norden
Ein Bestandskatalog der sammlung des RautenslraucbJoest-Museums (Ainu: Hunters, fishers, and
gatherers in northern Japan A catalogue of the
collection of the Rauten strauch-loestMuseums). Ethnologica, vol. 12. Cologne:
Rautenstrauch-Joest-Museum for Volkerkunde
Kroeber, A. L.
1939 "Cultural and Natural Areas of North America."
University of California Publications in American
Archaeology and Anthropology 38.
Krupnik, Igor, and William W. Fitzhugh (eds.)
Gateways to Jesup-2: The Archival Legacy of the Jesup
North Pacific Expedition, \89l-\902 Seattle:
University of Washington Press, forthcoming.
Krusenstern, Adam Johann von
1810 Reise um die Welt in den Jahren 1803, 1804, 1805 und
1806 (Voyage around the world in the years
1803, 1804, 1805, and 1806). 3 vols. St.
Petersburg: Schnoorsche Buchdruckerey.

Kubodera, Itsuhiko
1977a Ainujojishi: Shinyo, seiden no kenkyu (Ainu epics:
Studies of kamuy-yukar and oina). Tokyo:
Iwanami Shoten.
1977b Ainu no bungaku (Ainu literature). Tokyo:
Iwanami Shoten.
Kubodera, Itsuhiko, and Mashiho Chiri
1940 "Ainu no hoso-gami pakoro kamuy ni tsuite"
(About the smallpox god pakoro kamuy).
Jinruigaku Zasshi 55, no. 3: 30—61.
Kubota, Atsushi et al. (eds.)
1997 "Kosho bungaku: Ainu bungaku" (Oral tradition,
vol. 2: Ainu literature). In Iwanami koza Nihon
bungakushi (History of Japanese literature), vol.
17. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten
Kudo, Masaki
1989 Josaku to Emishi (Castle fences and Emishi). Tokyo:
Nyu Saiensu Sha.
Landor, Arnold Henry Savage
1 893 Alone with the Hairy Ainu Or, 3,800 Miles on a Pack
Saddle in Yezo and a Cruise to the Kurile Islands.
London: John Murray. Reprint, New York:
Johnson Reprint Company, 1970.
Langsdorff, Georg Heinrich von
1812 Bemerkungen aus einer Reise um die Welt in den Jabren
1803-1807 (Remarks on a voyage around the
world in the years 1803-1807). Vol. 2
Frankfurt: F. Wilmans.
Lantis, Margaret
1938 "The Alaska Whale Cult and its Affinities."
American Anthropologist 40. 428-64.
Latyshev, Vladislav M., and Mikhail M. Prokofiev
1988 Katalog etnograficheskikh kollektsii B. P. Pilsudskogo v
Sakhalinskom oblastnom kraevedcheskom muzee (Cata¬
logue of the Bronislaw Pilsudski collection at the
Sakhalin Regional Museum). Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk
Sakhalinskii obi. Kraevedcheskii niuzei
Laufer, Berthold
1902 The Decorative Art of the Amur Tribes. Publications of
the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, vol. 4,
Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural
History, vol. 7, Leiden/New York: N.p. Reprint,
New York: AMS Press, 1975.
Lavrov, Igor P.
1949 "Obvizobrazitel'nom iskusstve nivkhov i ainoviz
materialov Amuro-Sakhalinskoi ekspeditssii"
(On decorative art of the Nivkh and the Ainu
people: Based on the data collected by the
Amur-Sakhaiin Expedition). Kratkie Soobshcheniia
Instituta Etnograjii Akademiia Nauk SSSR 5: 32-39
Lebedintsev, Alexandr
1990 Early Coastal Cultures of Northwestern Primor'e (in
Russian). Vladivostok Nauka
1998 "Maritime Cultures of the North Coast of the
Sea of Okhotsk." Arctic Anthropology 35, no. 1:
296-320.
Lee, Molly
1995 "Types and Prototypes: Siberian Sources of
Alaskan Eskimo Coiled Baskets." American Indian
Art 20, no. 4: 56-69.
Lee, Molly, and Nelson Graburn
1997 "Was Diffusion to Colonial Anthropology
What Transnationalism Is to Post-Colonial
Anthropology? Theories of Change in the Context
of Jesup I and Jesup II" Paper delivered at the Jesup
Centenary Conference, American Museum of
Natural History, New York, November.
Levin, Maxim G.
1949 "Amuro-sakhalinskaia antropologoetnograficheskaia ekspeditsiia" (The AmurSakhalin anthropological and ethnographic
expedition). Kratkie Soobshcheniia Instituta Etnograjii
Akademia Nauk SSSR 5: 19-3 1.

1958 "Etnicheskaia antropologiia i problemy
etnogeneza narodov Dal'nego Vostoka."
Trudy Instituta Etnograjii Akademia Nauk SSSR 36.
English-language ed.: Ethnic Origins of the Peoples of
Northeastern Asia Translations from Russian Sources
3. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963.
Lindner, Friedrich Ludwig
1812 Neueste Kunde von Asien: 3. Slid- und Ost-Asien
(Newest research from Asia and East Asia, vol.
3) . Prague: Diesbachsche Buchhandlung.
Lindquist, Ivar
1960 Indo-European Features in the Ainu Language, with
Reference to the Thesis of Pierre Naert. Lunds
Universitets Aarsskrift 54, no. 1. Lund: C. W. K.
Gleerup.
Low, Setha M.
1976 "Contemporary Ainu Wood- and Stone
Carving." In Ethnic and Tourist Arts: Cultural
Expressions from the Fourth World, ed. Nelson H H.
Graburn, 21 1-26. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
MacDonald, George
1983 "Prehistoric Art of the Northern Northwest
Coast ." In Indian Art Traditions of the Northwest
Coast, ed Roy L. Carlson, 99-121. Burnaby,
British Columbia: Archaeology Press, Simon
Fraser University
Maeda, LIshio
1987 Hoppo shuryomin no kokogaku (Archaeology of
northern hunting people). Tokyo: Doseisha.
Majewicz, Alfred F.
1993 "On Poles Collecting Data Related to the
Anthropology and Material Culture of the
Ainu." In European Studies on Ainu Language and
Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 127-36. Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
Mamiya, Rinzo
1855 Kita Ezo zusetsu (Illustrations of northern Ezo, 4
vols.). Edo [Tokyo]: Harimaya Katsugoro.
Maraini, Fosco
1942 Gli iku-bashui degli Ainu (Ikupasuy of the Ainu).
Pubblicazioni del Istituto Italiano di Cultura,
vol. 1. Tokyo: Istituto Italiano di Cultura.
(English and Japanese summaries inserted in
pocket inside back cover).
1994 Ainu no ikupasuy (Ikupasuy of the Ainu). Shiraoi:
Ainu Minzoku Hakubutsukan.
Marsden, Brian G.
1993 The Minor Planet Circulars (Minor Planet Center,
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory,
Cambridge, Mass.), 1 September, 22509.
Mason, Otis Tufton
1970 Aboriginal American Basketry. Studies in a Textile Art
without Machinery. Glorieta, N.M.: Rio Grande
Press. Reprint of Smithsonian Institution
Publication no. 128 (1904).
Matsuda, Denjuro
1944 “Hokuidan"(An account of the northern
peoples). In Nihon shomin seikatsu shiryo shusei
(Resources on everyday life of the Japanese, vol.
4) , ed. Shin'ichiro Takakura. Tokyo: San'ichi
Shobo (originally published in 1821).
Matsuki, Akitomo
1973 Hokkaido no ishi (History of medicine in
Hokkaido). Hirosaki: Tsugaru Shobo.
Matsumae, Tokuhiro
1982 “Shotoku gonen Matsumae Shimanokami
sashidashi sorokakitsuke" (Matsumae
Shimanokami's report of the fifth year of
Shotoku [1715]). In Saisenkai shiryo (Saisenkai
data), ed Shin'ichiro Takakura. Sapporo:
Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta

Matsumoto, Hideo
1987 "Characteristics of the Mongoloid and
Neighboring Populations on the Basis of the
Genetic Markers of Immunoglobulins" (in
Japanese). Jinruigaku Zasshi 95. 291-304.
Matsuura, Takeshiro
1851 Sanko Ezo nisshi (Diary notes from new trip over
Hokkaido). Edo [Tokyo]: N.p. Reprint, Tokyo:
Yoshikawa Kobunkan, 1970.
1962 Shinpan Ezo Nisshi (New Ezo Diary, 2 vols.).
Ed. Tsunekichi Yoshida Tokyo: Jiji Tsushinsha
Reprint, 1984.
1977a "Kinsei Ezo jinbutsushi" (Biographies of the
modern Ainu). In Matsuura Takeshiro kikosbu
(Matsuura Takeshiro travelogue), ed. Takezo
Yoshida. Tokyo: Fuzanbo (originally published
in 1858).
1977b"Nosappu nisshi" (Nosappu diary). In Matsuura
Takeshiro kikosbu (Matsuura Takeshiro
travelogue), ed Takezo Yoshida. Tokyo:
Fuzanbo (originally published in 1858).
Mikami, Mariko
1986 Ainu ifuku chosa bokokusho \ (Ainu clothing
research report, 1). Hokkaido: Hokkaido
Bunkazai Hogo Kyokai.
Minagawa, Masao, and Takeru Akazawa
1985 "Dietary Patterns of Japanese Jomon HunterGatherers: Stable Nitrogen and Carbon
Isotope Analysis of Human Bones." In Pacific
Northeast Asia Prehistory, ed. C. Melvin Aikens
and Song Nai Rhee, 59-67. Pullman:
Washington State University Press.
Misawa, Shogo, Y. Hayashida, K. Omoto, S.
Harada,
H Matsumoto, and M. Hirai
1975 "Ainu no idenshigakuteki kosei" (Genetic
composition of the Ainu). In Anthropological and
Genetic Studies on the Japanese, ed. Saburo
Watanabe, Shiro Kondo, and Ei Matsunaga.
Japanese Committee for the International
Biological Program Synthesis, vol. 2, Human
Adaptability, vol. 2, 265-307 Tokyo:
University of Tokyo Press.
Mitsuoka, Shin'ichi
1987 Ainu no sokuseki (The footsteps of the Ainu).
8th ed. Shiraoi: Shiraoi Minzoku Bunka
Hozon Zaidan.
Miyabe, Kingo
1902 "A Letter Regarding the Composition of Ainu
Arrow Poison." Furness, Harrison, Hiller
Expeditions. University of Pennsylvania
Museum Archives.
Miyake, Yonekichi
1 884 "Ezogo to Nihongo no kankei ikani" (On a
question of the linguistic relationship between
Ainu and Japanese languages). Tokyo Gakugei
Zasshi: 35-36.
Miyazaki, Kiyoshi
1985 Wara (Straw). Mono to ningen no bunkashi (The
cultural history of people and materials), vol
55. Tokyo: Hosei Daigaku.
Mochanov, Yuri
1980 "Early Migrations to America in light of the
Dyuktai Paleolithic Culture in Northeast Asia."
In Early Native Americans, ed. David L, Browman,
119-33. The Hague: Mouton.
Mochanov, Yuri, and Svetlana A. Fedoseeva
1984 "Main Periods in the Ancient History of
North-East Asia." In Beringia in the Cenozoic Era,
ed. V. L. Kontrimavichus, 669-93. Rotterdam:
A. A. Balkema.
Mogami, Tokunai
1790 Ezo soshi (Ezo tales). Reprint, Tokyo: Kokusho
Kankokai, 1972.

B! BL.IOCRAPHY

399

National Cyclopaedia of American Biography
1926 "Hitchcock, Romyn." In The National Cyclopaedia
of American Biography, vol. 19, 42. New York:
James T, White Company.

Ogawa, Sanae

1927 Au pays des Aino Exploration anthropolgigue (In the
land of the Ainu: Anthropological investiga¬
tions) Paris: Masson.
1937 La civilisation a'inou et les cultures arctigues

Natori, Takemitsu

1996 Hoppo shominzoku no sekaikan (Essays on ideas and
beliefs among the northern peoples). Tokyo:
Sofukan.

Montandon, George

(Ainu civilization and arctic cultures).
Bibliotheque scientifique. Pans: Payot.
Morse, Edward Sylvester
1879 "Traces of an Early Race in Japan." Popular Science
Monthly, 257-66.Munro, Neil Gordon
Munro, Neil Gordon
1908 "On Korobbokuru." Jinruigaku Zasshi 23: 353-60.
1930 lyomante—The Ainu Bear Festival About the Bear
Ceremony among the Ainu of the Saru River Valley in
Hokkaido (filmed by Munro).

1962 Ainu Creed and Cult. Reprint, London: Greenwood
Press, 1979, London and New York: K. Paul
International, distributed by Columbia
University Press, 1996.
1994 Ainu Material Culture from the Notes of N G. Munro in
the Archive of the Royal Anthropological Institute, ed.

Birgit Ohlsen, intro. Brian Durrans. British
Museum Occasional Paper 96. London: British
Museum, Department of Ethnography.
Murayama, Shichiro
1968 "Ainu in Kamchatka." In Proceedings of the 8th
International Congress of Anthropological and
Ethnological Sciences, 84-86. Kyoto: Science

Council of Japan.
1992a Ainugo no kigen (The origin of the Ainu
language). Tokyo: San'ichi Shobo.
1992b "Word Parallels between Ainu and Other
Languages," Le Monde Oriental, 20

Naert, Pierre
1958 La situation linguislicjue de I'Ainou. Ainou et
Indoeuropeen. Lunds Universitets Aarsskrift 53, no.
4 Lund: C. W. K. Gleerup

Nagata, Hosei
1891

Hokkaido elogo chimei kai (Interpretation of

Hokkaido Ezo place-names). Sapporo:
Hokkaidocho. Reprint, Tokyo: Sofukan, 1984.

1974 Ainu to kokogaku (Ainu and archaeology). Natori
Takemitsu chosaku shu II (Papers of Takemitsu
Natori, vol. 2). Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan
Kikaku Senta.
1984 "Yuyoku sakebashi no shokeishiki to chiiki sei"
(Types and regionality of winged offering
sticks). In Kono Hiromichi hakushi botsugo nijunen
kinen bunshu (Collected papers in commemora¬
tion of the twentieth anniversary of the death of
Dr Kono Hiromichi). Sapporo. Hokkaido
Shuppan Kikaku Senta.

Nelson, Edward William
1899 The Eskimo about Bering Strait. Smithsonian

Institution Bureau of American Ethnology
Annual Report, no. 18, 19-518. Washington,
D C : Government Printing Office.
Nihon Kokogaku Kyokai (ed.)
1965 Ainu dento ongaku (Ainu traditional music). Tokyo:
Nihon Hoso Shuppan Kyokai.
1994 Kita Nihon no kokogaku: Minami to kita no chiikisei

(Archaeology of northern Japan: Northern and
southern characteristics). Tokyo: Yoshikawa
Kobunkan.
Nihon Mingu Gakkai
1997 Nihon mingu jiten (Japanese folkcraft dictionary).
Tokyo: Gyosei.

Niimi, Michko
1990 "Sea-Mammal Hunting of thejomon Culture in
Hokkaido" (in Japanese with English summary).
Bulletin of the Department of Archaeology, University of
Tokyo 9

I 37-71.

Forum.- Considerations on the Formation of Ainu Culture,

15-22. Abashiri Hokkaido Hoppo Minzoku
Hakubutsukan.

Nakagawa, Hiroshi
1995 Ainugo Chitose hogen jiten (The Ainu-Japanese
dictionary: Chitose dialect). Tokyo: Sofukan.

Nishimura, Toyohiro

1997a Ainu no monogatari sekai (Ainu world of narratives)
Tokyo: Heibonsha.

1986 "The Transition of Hunting and Fishing
Activities in Hokkaido" (in Japanese with
English summary). Bulletin of the National Museum of

"Kotoi, an Ancient Ainu Chief at Akkeshi,
Hokkaido." Jinruigaku Zasshi 27: 488—92, 562—67.

1997bEkusupuresu Ainugo (Express Ainu). Tokyo:
Hakusuisha

Nakamoto, Masachie
1985 "Ainu to Ryukyu" (Ainu and Ryukyu). Gengo 14,
no. 3: 94-95.

Nakano, Takamasa, and Kunio Kobayashi
1967 Nihon no shizen (Natural history of Japan).
Iwanami Shinsho 346. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten

Nanba, Takuo
1985 "Chishima Ainu no cho-hi-i m tsuite" (Birdfeather garments from the Kurile Islands). Milieu
Mansurii 20, no. 1: 11-16.

Narita, Tokuhei
1972 "Ainu niondai ni omou" (Thoughts on the Ainu
problem). Hoppo Bungei 5: 2.
1984 "Discrimination against Ainus and the

International Covenant on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination." In The
United Nations, Japan and Human Rights: To

400

Ogihara, Shinko

Ogihara, Shinko, and Chuner M. Taksami (eds.)
with Ainu Project Group
1998 Catalogue: Ainu Collections of the Peter the Great
Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography, Russian
Academy of Sciences

1969 "Sakhalin Ainu Folklore." Anthropological Studies,
no. 2.
1973a "Mashiho Chiri: Ainu Scholar of Ainu Culture
and Professor of Linguistics." With Hideo
Fujimoto. American Anthropologist 75: 868-76.
1973b "The Shamanism of the Ainu of the Northwest
Coast of Southern Sakhalin." Ethnology 12, no. 1:
15-29.
1974 The Ainu of the Northwest Coast of Southern Sakhalin.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Reprint,
Prospect Heights, 111.: Waveland Press, 1984.
1976a "Regional Variations in Ainu Culture." American
Ethnologist 3, no. 2: 297-329.
1976b "Shamanism and World View: Case of the Ainu
of the Northwest Coast of Southern Sakhalin."
In The Realm of the Extra-Human. Agents and
Audiences, ed. Agehananda Bharati, 175-200. The
Hague: Mouton, Chicago: Aldine.
1980 "Shamans and Imu among Two Ainu Croups:
Toward a Cross-Cultural Model of Interpreta¬
tion." Ethos 8, no. 3: 204-28. Reprinted in The
Culture-Bound Syndromes. Folk Illnesses of Psychiatric
and Anthropological Interest, ed. Ronald C. Simons

and Charles C. Hughes, 91-110. Dordecht,
Holland, and Boston: Reidel, 1985.
1981

Illness and Healing among the Sakhalin Ainu: A
Symbolic Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.
1984 Illness and Culture in Contemporary Japan: An
Anthropological View. Cambridge: Cambridge
Llniversity Press.

Ohtsuka, Kazuyoshi
1982 "Ainu no kibori guma" (Ainu bear woodcarvmgs). Gekkan Minpaku (April): 15-17.
1993

Japanese History 6. 53-74.

design motifs). Osaka: Kokuritsu Minzokugaku
Hakubutsukan.

1942 Karafuto Ainu (Ainu of Sakhalin Island).

Toyohara: Karafutocho.
Oba, Toshio
1955 "Moioro kaizuka no kokkakki" (Bone artifacts
from shell middens of Moioro). Hoppo Bunka
10.

1956 "Moioro kaizuka shutsudo no Ohotsuku-shiki

doki" (Okhotsk ceramics from shell middens of
Moioro). Hoppo Bunka Kenkyu Hokoku 1 1.
Obayashi, Taryo
1997 "The Ainu Concept of the Soul." In Circumpolar
Animism and Shamanism, ed. Takako Yamada and
Takashi Irimoto, 9-20. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Daigaku.
Ogawa, M.
1993 "The Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection
. Act and Assimilatory Education." In Indigenous

(ed.) Ainu moshiri. Minzoku mon'yo kara mita Ainu no
se kai (The world of the Ainu through their

Nishizuru, Sadaka

Kenkyu Hokoku

Tokyo: Sofukan.

Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko

Nishimoto, Toyohiro
1996 "Ainu Culture Formation Considered from an
Animal Perspective" (in Japanese). In The Museum

Nishimoto, Toyohiro, and Takao Sato
1991 "The Animal Bones from Otafuku Iwa Cave site"
(in Japanese). In Otafuku Iwa Iseki (Otafuku Iwa
Site), 247-64. Rausu: Rausu-cho Kyoiku linkai.

1911

1986 "Arigato Bikki" (Thank you, Bikky). Bijutsu
Asahikawa 54: 7-9.

Ohyi, Haruo
1975 "The Okhotsk Culture, a Maritime Culture
of the Southern Okhotsk Sea Region."
In Prehistoric Maritime Adaptations of the Circumpolar
Zone, ed. William W. Fitzhugh, 123-58.
The Hague: Mouton.

Okada, Hiroaki
1998 "Maritime Adaptations in Northern Japan." Arctic
Anthropology 35, no. 1: 335-39.

Okada, Minoru (ed.)
1988 Genshoku makino wa-kan yakuso daizukan (Illustrated
Japanese and Chinese medicinal plants of the
world in color). Tokyo: Hokuryukan.

Okamura, Kichiemon
1984 "Kogeishi kenkyu noto, IV" (Research notes on
the history of arts and crafts, 4). Tamagawa
Daigaku Bungakubu Kiyo 25: 157-76.

Commemorate the 35th Anniversary of the Universal

Minorities and EducationAustralian and Japanese

Declaration of Human Rights, ed. Buraku Kaiho

Perspectives of their Indigenous Peoples, the Ainu,

Okladnikov, Alexei Pavlovich

Kenkyusho (in Japanese). Osaka: Kaiho
Shuppansha.

Aborigines and Torres Straits Islanders, ed. Noel Loos

198 1

and Takeshi Osanai. Tokyo: San'yusha.

B I BLIOGRAPHY

Ancient Rock Art of the Amur Region (in Russian).

Leningrad: Aurora Press.

1983 Drevnee Poselenie Kondon [Priamur'e] (The Ancient
Kondon Site [Priamur'e]). Novosibirsk: Nauka
Okuyama, Ryo
1966 Ainu suiboshi (The history of the Ainu's decline
and tall). Sapporo: Miyama Shobo.
Olschleger, Hans Dieter
1989 Llmwelt und Wirlschafi dtr Ainu: Bemerkungen zur
Okologie enter Wildbeutergesellschaft (The environ¬
ment and economy of the Ainu: Observations
on the ecology of a hunting society). Berlin:
Reimer.

Oswalt, Robert L
1964 "A Comparative Study of Two Porno Lan¬
guages.” In Studies in California Linguistics, ed.
William Bright. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Oyabe, Jenichiro
1 898 A Japanese Robinson Crusoe. Boston and Chicago:
The Pilgrim Press.
Patrie, James
1982 The Genetic Relationship of the Ainu Language.
Honolulu: The University Press of Hawaii
Philippi, Donald L
1979 Songs of Gods, Songs of Humans. The Epic Tradition of
the Ainu. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.

1993 "John Batchelor's Contributions to Ainu
Ethnography.” In European Studies on Ainu
Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 137-50.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut
fur Japanstudien der Phihpp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.

Pilsudski, Bronislaw
1906 "Karafuto Ainu no jotai" (The status of the
Sakhalin Ainu). Sekai 26. 57-66, 27: 42-49.

Omoto, Keiichi
1972 "Polymorphisms and Genetic Affinities of the
Ainu of Hokkaido." Human Biology of Oceania 1:
278-88.

1907a "Kratkii ocherk ekonomicheskogo polozheniia
ainov na o. Sakhalin” (Brief essay on the
economic status of the Sakhalin Ainu). Zapiski po
lzucheniiu Amurskogo Kraia 10: 89-1 16.

1995 "Genetic Diversity and the Origins of the
'Mongoloid'" In The Origin and Past of Modern
Humans as Viewed from DNA, ed. Sydney Brenner
and Kazuo Hanihara, 92-109. Singapore: World
Scientific Publishing

1907b"Otchyoto komandirovke k ainam i orokam
ostrova Sakhalina v 1903-1905” (Report on field
trip to the Ainu and the Orok People of
Sakhalin Island in the years 1903-1905). Izvestiia

Omoto, Keiichi, and Shogo Misawa
1976 "The Genetic Relations of the Ainu In The
Origin of the Australians, ed. A. I. Kirk and A. G.
Thorne, 365-76. Canberra: Australian Institute
of Aboriginal Studies
Omoto, Keiichi, and N. Saito
1997 "Genetic Origins of the Japanese: A Partial
Support for the Dual Structure Hypothesis."
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 102:
437-46.
Oni, Haruto
1957 "Ainuigo, Nihongo oyobi Ryukyugo ni kyotsu
suru tokushuon” (Special sounds common
to Ainu, Japanese, and Ryukyu languages).
Paper given at Nihon jinrui gakkai Nihon
minzokugaku kyokai rengo taikai kiji (Proceed¬
ings of Joint Conference of Japan Anthropology
Society and Japan Ethnology Association).
Ono, Yugo
1991 "Kita no rikkyo” (Northern land bridge)
(includes English abstract). Dai 4-ki Kenkyu 29,
no. 3: 183-92.
1997 Hokkaido mori to kawa kara no dengon (Messages
from nature in Hokkaido). Sapporo: Hokkaido
Shinbunsha
Ono, Yugo, and Y. Igarashi
1992 Natural History of Hokkaido. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Daigaku.
Orekhov, Alexandr A.
1998 "The Development of Maritime Adaptations
Among the Early Populations of the Northwest
Bering Sea Region," Arctic Anthropology 35, no. 1:
263-80.
Osaka Jinken Rekishi Shiryokan
1994 Kindai Nihon to Ainu minzoku (Modern Japan and
the Ainu). Osaka: Osaka Jinken Rekishi
Shiryokan.

Russkogo Komiteta Dlia Izucheniia Srednei i Vostochnoi

Quimby, George Irving
1985 "Japanese Wrecks, Iron Tools, and Prehistoric
Indians of the Northwest Coast." Arctic
Anthropology 22, no. 2: 7-15.
Radlinski, Ignacy
1892 (ed.) Slournik narzecza Ainow zamieszkujacych wyspe
Szumszu (Dictionary of the Ainu language)
Krakow: Rozprawy Akademii Umejetnosci,
Wydzial Filologiczny.
Refsing, Kirsten
1974 Ah annotated catalogue of Ainu materials in the East
Asian Institute of Aarhus University Scandinavian
Institute of Asian Studies Monograph Series 20.
Lund: Studentlitteratur.
1986 The Ainu LanguageThe Morphology and Syntax of the
Sbizunai Dialect. Aarhus: Aarhus University Press.
1993

"The Ainu Concept of Time as Expressed
Through Language." In European Studies on Ainu
Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 91-101.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.

1996 (ed.) The Ainu Library I. Early European Writings on
the Ainu Language. 10 vols, Richmond, England:
Curzon Press, Oxford University Press.
1998

(ed.) The Ainu Library II: Origins of the Ainu

Azii v Istoricheskom, Arkbeologicheskom,

Language.- The Ainu-Indo-European Controversy.

Lingvisticheskom Otnosbeniiakb 7: 20-52.

5 vols. Richmond, England: Curzon Press,
Oxford University Press.

1909a "Der Schamanismus bei den Ajnu-Stammen von
Sachalin" (Shamanism of the Sakhalin Ainu
tribes). Globus 15: 261-74, 16: 1 17-32.
Reprinted in English as "Shamanism of Sakhalin
Ainu," Northern Culture Study Report 14 (1959).
1909b"‘Tusu-kuru': ainskie shamany" (Tusu-kuru The
Ainu shamans). Russkie Vedomosti 166: 3-4.
1912 (ed.) Materials for the Study of the Ainu Language and
Folklore. Krakow: Imperial Academy of Sciences.
1915 "Na medvedzem prazknike ajnov o. Sachalina"
(At the bear ceremony of the Sakhalin Ainu).
Zhivaia Starina 23, no. 1—2: 67-162.
1996 Dorogoi Lev Yakovlevich Pis'ma L. Y. Shternbergy
1893—1917gg (Dear Lev Yakovlevich: Letters to
L. Y. Shternberg 1893-1917). Yuzhno-Sakhalin
Sakhalinskii Oblastnoi Kraevedcheskii Muzei.
Pitul'ko, Vladimir V.
1993 "An Early Holocene Site in the Siberian High
Arctic." Arctic Anthropology 30, no. 1: 13-21.
Ponomarenko, A. K.
1985 Drevniaia Kul'tura Itel'menov Vostochnoi Kamchatki
(The Old Itel’men Culture of Eastern
Kamchatka). Moscow: Nauka.
1993 "Novye Arkheologicheshie pamiatniki Yuzhnoi
Kamchatki i Poluostrova Lopatka (K Voprosu
ob Obitanii Ainov na Yuzhnoi Kamchatke)
(New Archaeological Sites of Southern
Kamchatka and the Lopatka Peninsula [On the
Question of Habitation by the Ainu in
Southern Kamchatka]). Kraevedcheskie Zapiski 8:
3-136.

Osborn, Henry Fairfield
1929 "Bashford Dean." Natural History 29, no I:
102-103.

Popov, Alexander A.
1954 "Pletenie i tkachestvo u narodov Sibiri v XIXpervoi chetverti XX stoletiia" (Weaving and
wickerwork among the native people in Siberia,
nineteenth to early twentieth century). Sbomik
Muzeya Antropologii i Etnografii 16. 41-146.

Ossenberg, Nancy S.
1986 Isolate Conservatism and Hybridization in the
Population History of Japan: The Evidence of
Nonmetric Cranial Traits." In Prehistoric HunterGatherers in Japan: New Research Methods, ed. Takeru
Akazawa and C. Melvin Aikens, 199-215
Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.

Prunner, Gernot
1993 "The Ainu Scroll at the Museum of Ethnogra¬
phy, Hamburg." In European Studies on Ainu
Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 229-68.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.

Reichert, Edward Tyson, M.D.
1903 Ahho Noki, or Bushi: The Arrow Poison of the
Ainus." University of Pennsylvania Medical Bulletin
(April).
Roche, Judith, and Meg Hutchinson (eds.)
1998 First Salmon, First People. Salmon Tales of the North
Pacific Rim. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
Rosenstone, Robert A.
1988 Mirror in the Shrine: American Encounters with Meiji
Japan. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Rossbach, Ed
1973 Baskets as Textile Art. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold Co.
Rousselot, Jean-Loup, William W. Fitzhugh,
and Aron L. Crowell
1988 "Maritime Economies of the North Pacific Rim."
In Crossroads of Continents: Cultures of Siberia and
Alaska, ed. William W. Fitzhugh and Aron L.
Crowell, 151-72. Washington, DC
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Saito, Kenji
1979 "Hokkaido no kibori guma" (Bear woodcarvings
in Hokkaido). Shiritsu Asahikaura Kyodo
Hakubutsukan Kenkyu Hokoku, no. 38: 4.
1980 "Ido-ten: 'Kato Kensei o Tazunete' o oete"
(Finishing the traveling exhibition "Visiting
Kensei Kato"), Shiritsu Asahikaura Kyodo
Hakubutsukan Kenkyu Hokoku, no. 44: 3.
Saito, Reiko
1994 "Hoppo minzoku bunka kenkyu ni okeru kanko
jinruigakuteki shiten: Edo-Taisho ki ni okeru
Ainu no baai" (The study of tourist arts in
ethnographic records: In reference to the Ainu
from the Edo era to the Taisho era). Hokkaidoritsu
Hoppo Minzaku Hakubutsukan Kenkyu Kiyo 3: 139—
60.
1995 "Taiheiyo eugan chiiki ni okeru shokubutsusei
senihin ni tsuite no kosatsu: Orimono o chushin
to suru busshitsu bunka kenkyu" (A perspective
study on weaving plant fiber on the north
Pacific Rim: Material culture in basketry).
Hokkaidoritsu Hoppo Minzaku Hakubutsukan Kenkyu
Kiyo 4:

11 3—34.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
401

Sakakura, Genjiro
1943 "Hokkai zuihitsu" (An essay on the Northern
Sea)[ 1739], In Nihon shomin seikatsu shiryo shusei
(The daily life of Japanese people), ed. Shini'chiro
Takakura, vol. 4- Tokyo: San'ichi Shobo.
Sala, G. C.
1975 "Protest and the Ainu of Hokkaido." Japan
Interpreter 10, no. 1: 44—65.
Sanko Dosokei
1980 Shimryo-shi: Dai-san koto chu gakko hachiju-nen shi
(History of Shimryo. The eightieth anniversary
of Dai-San High School). Kyoto: Sanko
Dosokei
Sansom, G. B , Sir
1958 A History of Japan. 3 vol. Stanford Studies in the
-63 Civilizations of Eastern Asia. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Sapporo Chiho Saibansho
1997 "Nibutani Decision." In Chiho Saibansho (Sapporo)
(Sapporo District Court) (March): 75-76.
Sapporo Terebi Hoso Kabushiki Gaisha (ed.)
1983 Ekasbi tofuchi (Ekashi and Juchi). Sapporo:
Sapporo Terebi Hoso Kabushiki Gaisha
Sarashina, Genzo
1955 Kuma matsuri- lyomante (The bear festival:
Iyomante). Tokyo: Nire Shobo.

Schildkrout, Enid, and Curtis A. Keim
1990 African Reflections: Art from Northeastern Zaire
Seattle: University of Washington Press, New
York: American Museum of Natural History.
Sekiba, Fujihiko
1896 Ainu ijidan (An account of Ainu medicine).
Tokyo: Tozai Shomoku Zohan.
Shafranovskaia, Tamara K.
1979 Muzei Antropologii i Etnografii Akademii Nauk SSSR
(Academy of Sciences Museum of Anthropol¬
ogy and Ethnography). Leningrad: Nauka,
Leningradotd-nie.
Shapsnikoff, Anfesia, and Raymond Hudson
1974 "Aleut Basketry." Anthopological Papers of the
University of Alaska 16, no. 1: 41-69.
Shinya, Gyo
1977 Ainu minzoku teikoshi (The history of Ainu
resistance). Tokyo: San'ichi Shobo.
1979 Kotan ni ikiru bitobito (Life in the kotan). Tokyo:
San’ichi Shobo.
Shiratori, Kurakichi
1909 "Nikkan Ainu san gengo no sushi ni tsuite
(On Japanese, Korean, and Ainu numerals).
Sbigaku Zasshi 20, no. 1—3.

1968 Rekishi to minzoku Ainu (Ainu history and customs).
Tokyo: Shakai Shisosha.

Shirayama, Tomomasa
1971 Hokkaido Ainujinkoshi (History of the Ainu
population change in Hokkaido). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Keizaishi Kenkyujo.

1971a Ainu minwashu (Ainu tales). Sapporo: Kita Shobo.

Shternberg, Leo (Lev lakovlovich)

197lbAimt densetsusbu (Ainu legends). Sapporo: Kita
Shobo
Sasaki, Toshikazu
1972 "Chuko chusei ni okeru Ezo no fuzoku ni tsuite"
(Customs of Ezo in the 'middle ancient' and
medieval ages). Hokkaido no Bunka 25. 8-36.

1925 "Divine Election in Primitive Religion." In XXI
Congres International des Ame'ricanistes, Session de
Goteborg, 1924, 472-512. Goteborg: Congres
International de Americanistes.
1929 "The Ainu Problem." Anthropos 24. 755-99
1933

Gilyaki, Orochi, Goldi, Negidalsti, Aimi. Stull i
materialy (Gilyaks, Orochs, Golds, Negidals,

1988 "On the Tokyo National Museum Material
Collection: Part 2" (in Japanese). Hokkaidoritsu

Ainu: Works and materials). Khabarovsk.
Dalgiz.

Ainu Minzoku Bunka Kenkyu Senta Kiyo 4.

1990 "lyomante-ko: Shamo ni yoru Ainu bunka rikai
no kosatsu (On the lyomante Thoughts on shamo
understanding of Ainu culture). Rekisbigaku
Kenkyu 613: 11 1-20.
1992 Kodai no Emishi: Kita Nihon Jomonjin no matsuei
(Ancient Emishi: Descendants of Jomon people
in northern Japan). With Masaki Kudo. Tokyo:
Kawade Shobo Shinsha.

Shubin, Valerii O
1994 "Aleut in the Kurile Islands 1820-1870." In
Anthropology of the North Pacific Rim, ed. William
W. Fitzhugh and Valerie Chaussonnet, 337-46.
Washington, D C.: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Siddle, Richard
1993 "Academic Exploitation and Indigenous
Resistance: The Case of the Ainu." In Indigenous

1993a "Ainu-e in European and American Museums." In

Minorities and Education. Australian and Japanese

Ethnological Study of Ainu Materials in North American

Perspectives of their Indigenous Peoples, the Amu,

Museums, ed. Yoshinobu Kotani, 32-51. Nagoya:
Nagoya University.
1993b "On Ainu-e. Pictorial Descriptions of Ainu Life
and Customs." In European Studies on Ainu Language
and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 217-28.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
1995 Ainu no kogei (Ainu arts and crafts). Nihon no
bijutsu, no. 354. Tokyo: Shibundo.
Sato, Naotaro
1961 "Ainu no shukyo to shakai seido" (Religion and
social institutions of the Ainu). Kusbiro no Kodai
Bunka 3: 5-8.
Sayce, Roderick Llrwick
1933 Primitive Arts and Crafts An Introduction to the Study
of Material Culture. Cambridge, England: The
University Press.

Aborigines and Torres Straits Islanders, ed. Noel Loos

and Takeshi Osanai. Tokyo: San'yusha.
1996 Race, Resistance and the Ainu of Japan. London and
New York: Routledge.
Siebold, Philipp Franz von
I 832 Nippon■ Archiv zur Bescbreibung von Japan und dessen
Neben- und Schutzliindern . . (Nippon: Archive
describing Japan and its neighbors and pro¬
tectorates . . .). Leiden: Philipp Franz von Siebold.
2nd ed., Wurzburg and Leipzig: Leo Worl
1 854 Puteshestvie po Japonii (Travel in Japan). St.
Petersburg: Izd A. A. Pliushara.
1881

"Ethnologische Studien uber die Ainos auf der
Insel Yesso" (Ethnological studies of the Ainos
on Yesso Island). Zeitschrift jiir Ethnologic 13:
supplement

Scheube, Botho
1882 "Die Ainos" (The Ainu). Mitteilungen der Deutschen
Gesellschaftfiir Natur- und Volkerkunde Ostasiens 3,
no. 26: 220-58.

Sjoberg, Katarina
1993 The Return of the Ainu: Cultural Mobilization and the
Practice of Ethnicity in Japan. Chur, Switzerland,
and Langhorne, Pa.: Harwood Academic
Publishers.

402

B I BLIOCRAPHY

Slawik, Alexander
1982 "Die Probleme um die Enstehungsgeschichte des
Japanischen und seine Ainuide Komponente"
(Problems of the history of the origin of Japanese
and its Ainu components). Japanforschungen 5.
Sofue, Takao, Sue (Hara) Hiroko, and Yasuhara (Taiji)
Murakami
1976 "Cultural Anthropological Research on Cradles"
(in Japanese). In Bunka to parsonaritei (Culture and
personality), ed. Takao Sofue, 193-214. Tokyo:
Kobundo.
Song, Yaoliang
1992 The Deified Human-Face Petroglyphs of Prehistoric China
Hong Kong: Joint Publishing Company Ltd.
1998 "Prehistoric Human-Face Petroglyphs of the
North Pacific Region." Arctic Studies Center Newsletter
Supplement (National Museum of Natural History,
Washington, D C.) 6, no. I: 1-4.
Sonohara, T.
1997 "Toward a Genuine Redress for an Unjust Past:
The Nibutani Dam Case." Murdoch University
Electronic Journal of Law 4, no. 2.
Spevakovski, Alexander B.
1993 "Ainu Collections in the Museums of St.
Petersburg." In European Studies on Ainu Language and
Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 207-14. Monographien 6
aus dem Deutschen Institut fur Japanstudien der
Philipp-Franz-von-Siebold-Stiftung. Munich
ludicium-Verlag
Starr, Frederick
1904 The Ainu Group at the Saint Louis Exposition Chicago:
Open Court Publishing Co.
1909 "Field notes." Frederick Starr Papers, Depart -1 I ment of Special Collections, University of
Chicago Library.
Steller, Georg Wilhelm
1774 Bescbreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka, dessen
Einwohner, deren Sitten, Namen, Lebensart und verscbiedenen
Gewohnheiten (A description of Kamchatka, its
occupants, their customs, names, lifestyle, and
various habits). Frankfurt and Leipzig: J. G.
Fleischer. Reprint, Bonn: Holos Verlag, 1996

Stephan, John J.
1971 Sakhalin: A History. Oxford. Clarendon Press.
1974 The Kuril Islands Russo-Japanese Frontier in the Pacific.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Stepney, Philip H R
1995 Art and Life of the Ainu Edmonton : The Provincial
Museum of Alberta.
Sudo, Takashi, Takao Imaizumi, and Kiyotari Tsuboi (eds.)
1991 Kodai no Nihon: Tohoku/Hokkaido (Ancient Japan:
Tohoku/Hokkaido). Vol. 9. Tokyo: Kadokawa
Shoten.
Sugawara, Kosuke
1968 Gendai no Ainu. Minzoku ido no roman (Modem Ainu: The
romance of tribal migration). Tokyo: Cenbunsha.
Sugiyama, Sueo
1926 Ainu mon’yo (Ainu design motifs) Tokyo: Kogei
Bijutsu Kenkyusha.
1934 Ainu no kogei (Ainu arts and crafts). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta
Sunazawa, Bikky
1976 Aoi sakyu nite, 1964-1973 (In the blue sand dune,
1964-1973). Sapporo: Bikky Arts
1985 "Mokucho no kokoro" (Heart of wood). Nihon no
Dento Kogei (March).

1988 "Minzoku to geijutsu to shizen to" (With people,
art, and nature). In Ashita o tsukuru Ainu minzoku
(Ainu people build their future), ed. Ainu Minzoku
no Genzai to Mirai o Kangaeru Kai. Tokyo:
Miraisha.

Suttles, Wayne P. (ed.)
1990a Handbook ojNorth American Indians: Northwest Coast. Vol.
7. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.

1970a "lnaw." In Aimi minzoku-shi (Ethnology of the
Ainu), ed. Ainu Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai,
634-45. Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.

1990b '‘Environment." In Handbook of North American
Indians: Northwest Coast. Vol. 7. Washington,
D C. Smithsonian Institution.

1970b "Shakai keitai” (The social structure). In Ainu
minzoku-shi (Ethnology of the Ainu), ed. Ainu
Bunka Hozon Taisaku Kyogikai, 159—76, Tokyo:
Daiichi Hoki Shuppan.

Suzuki, Hisashi
1969 "Microevolutionary Changes in the Japanese
Population from the Prehistoric Age to the
Present Day” (in Japanese). Journal of the Faculty of
Sciroce, University of Tokyo, Section V (Anthropology)
3: 279-309.
Suzuki, Yasutami
1996 "Kodai oken to koryu" (Sovereignty in the
ancient age and cultural exchanges) In Kodai
Enushi no sekai to koryu (Cultural exchanges of the
ancient Enushi), ed Yasutami Suzuki. Tokyo:
Shin Jinbutsu Oral Sha
Takabeya, Fukuhei
1939 "Ainu jukyo no kenkyu" (A study of Ainu
dwellings). In Hoppo bunka kenkyu hokoku (Reports
on northern culture studies). Hokkaido:
Hokkaido Teikoku Daigaku
Takabeya, Fukuhei, and Shin'ichiro Takakura
1969 "Jukyo" (Dwellings). In Ainu minzokushi
(Ethnology of the Ainu). Tokyo: Daiichi
Hosoku Shuppan
Takahashi, Osantu
1993 "Faunal Remains from District-A at Bibi-8 Site"
(in Japanese). Report of the Hokkaido Maizo Bunkazai
Center 83, no. 1: 201-205.
Takahashi, Taizo
1988 "Kinsei Ezochi no shippei shi" (Elistory of
diseases in modern Ezo). In Ezochi no iryo
(Medical treatments in Ezo), ed Sapporo
Ishigaku Kenkyukai Sapporo Hokkaido
Shuppan Kikaku Senta
Takahashi, Toniio
1963 Ezo. Tokyo Yoshikawa Kobunkan
Takakura, Shini’chiro
1939 "Kinsei ni okeru Karafuto o chushin toshita
Nichiman koeki" (Japanese-Manchurian trade in
Sakhalin in modern-era Japan). Hoppo Bunka
Kenkyu Hokoku I: 1-32.
1940 "Ainu buraku-no hensen" (Changes in Ainu
villages). Nempo Shakai Gaku 7.
1942 Ainu seisakushi (History of policy toward the
Ainu). Tokyo-. Nihon Hyoronsha,
1943 Hokuhen, Kaitaku, Ainu. Tokyo: Takemura Shobo.
1947 Hokkaido takushoku shi (History of Hokkaido
colonization). Sapporo: Hakyo Shoin.
1949 Hokkaido no rekishi (History of Hokkaido).
Sapporo: Sapporo Kodansha
1953

"Ezo fuzokuga ni tsuite" (On ethnographic
drawings of Ezo). In Kyodo kenkyu sbiryo
(Collaborative research report). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Kyodo Kenkyukai

1955 "Chishima Karafuto no kaihatsu to doiin"
(The development of the Kuriles and Sakhalin
and its effect on the aborigines). Hoppo Bunka
Kenkyu Hokoku 10: 55—81.
1957

"Meiji-izen no Hokkaido ni okeru nobokugyo"
(Agriculture in Hokkaido before the Meiji
period). Hoppo Bunka Kenkyu Hokoku 12: 13-41.

1960 The Ainu of Northern Japan: A Study in Conquest and
Acculturation. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society vol. 50, no. 4. Philadel¬
phia: American Philosophical Society
1969 Kayani kenchikuni tomonaugirei. Chise nomi (House¬
building ceremonies). Tokyo: Daiichi Hoki
Shuppan

1972 Ainu seisakushi: Shimpan (History of policy toward
the Ainu: New edition). Tokyo: San’ichi Shobo.
1973 Ainu-e shusei (A collection of Ainu-e pictures).
Tokyo: Bancho Shobo.
Taksami, Chuner M.
1969 "Materialy MAE po etnografii ainov Yuzhnogo
Sakhalina: 19-nachalo 20v" (MAE ethnographic
collections on the Ainu people of southern
Sakhalin Island, 1800 to early 1900s). Sbornik
Muzeya Antropologii i Elhnografii 25: 337-62.
Tamura, Suzuko
1996 Ainugo jitein Saru bogen (Ainu-lapanese dictionary:
Saru dialect). Tokyo: Sofukan.
Tanda, Hitoshi
1996 "Ezochi no shippei shoshi: Baidoku" (Reports on
disease in Ezo: Syphilis) In Hokkaido no iryo Sono
ayumi (Medicine in Hokkaido: Its history), ed.
Nihon Ishigaku Kenkyukai. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Iryo Shinbunsha.

1903

Chishima Ainu (Ainu in the Kurile Islands).
Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kobunkan.

1919 Etudes arcbeologigues et ethnologipues: Les Ainou des
lies Kouriles. Tokyo Daigaku, Rigakubu, Journal
of the College of Science, Imperial LIniversity of
Tokyo, vol. 42. Tokyo: University of Tokyo.
1926 Taishi edencku no Ainu jimbutsu-zu (Pictures of
Ainu in pictorial bibliographies ofPrince
Shotoku). Kyokuto minzoku 1: 104-29..
1976 Chishima Ainu (Ainu in the Kurile Islands).
Torii Ryuzo zenshu (Collected works of Ryuzo
Torii, vol. 7). Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunsha.
Trofimova, Tatyana A.
1932 "Kainskoi probleme" (About the Ainu issue).
Antropologicheskii Zhurnal 2: 89-103.
Tsuboi, Kiyotari (ed.)
1986 Zusetsu hakkutsu ga kataru Nihon shi: Hokkaido/
Tohoku (An illustrated history of Japan based
on archaeological findings, vol. L Hokkaido/
Tohoku). Tokyo: Shin Jinbutsu Orai Sha.
Tsuboi, Shogoro
1887 "Koropok-guru Hokkaido ni sumishinar
ubeshi" (The Koropok-guru seem to have
inhabited Hokkaido). Jinruigaku Zasshi 2:
93-97.

Tanisawa, Shoichi, and Toshikazu Sasaki (eds.)
1982 Hata Mocbimaro no "Ezo-shima kikan" (Curious
sights of Ezo Island). Tokyo: University of
Tokyo Press (originally published 1799).

Tsuda, FHarumi
1988 "Ainu no yakuso" (Medicinal plants of the
Ainu). In Ezochi no iryo (Medical treatment in
Ezo), ed. Sapporo Ishigaku Kenkyukai
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta.

Tarenetzky, A I
1890 "Beitrage zur Craniologie der Aino auf Sachalin"
(Contributions to the craniology of the Ainu).
Memoires de l Acadamie des Sciences de St. Petersburg 7,
no. I 3.

Tsunano, Yoshihiko (ed.)
1990 Umi to retto bunka. Nibonkai to kitaguni bunka
(Ocean and island culture, vol. 1: The Sea of
Japan and northern cultures). Tokyo:
Shogakukan.

Teague, Ken
1993 "The Amu Collection at the Horniman Museum
and Library, London." In European Studies on Ainu
Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 167-80.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen lnstitut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.

Turner, Christy C. II
1976 "Dental Evidence on the Origins of the Ainu
and Japanese." Science 193: 911 — 13.

Tezuka, Kaoru
1995 "History of Japanese Policy towards the Ainu "
In Art and Life of the Ainu, ed Philip H. R. Stepney,
13—16. Edmonton: The Provincial Museum of
Alberta.
1998 "Long-Distance Trade Networks and Shipping
in the Ezo Region." Arctic Anthropology 35, no. 1:
350-60.
Thiele, Peter
1993 "Ainu Collections at the Linden Museum,
Stuttgart." In European Studies on Ainu Language
and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 181-92.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen lnstitut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich ludicium-Verlag.
Todd, David P.
1 888 Preliminary Report of the Total Solar Eclipse of 1887.
American Eclipse Expedition to Japan. Amherst,
Mass.: The L.awrence Observatory at Amherst
College
Tokyo Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan
1992 Tokyo Kokuritsu Hakubutsukan Zuhan moktiroku Ainu
minzoku shiryo hen (Illustrated Catalogue of the
Tokyo National Museum: Ainu materials).
Tokyo: Tokyo Kokuritsu Hokubutsukan.
1993 Ainu kogei (Ainu crafts). Tokyo: Tokyo Kokuritsu
Hokubutsukan.
Torii, Ryuzo
1901 "Who Were the Occupants of Stone Age Sites
in the Kurile Islands?" (in Japanese). Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Tokyo 17: 5-21.

1979 Dental Anthropological indications of
Agriculture among the Jomon People of
Central Japan. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 51 (4): 619-635.
1989 "Teeth and Prehistory in Asia." Scientific
American 260 70-77.
Ueniura, Hideki
1997 "Nibutani Damu Hanketsu to Ainu bunka
shinkoho" (The Nibutani Decision and the
Law for the Promotion of Ainu Culture).
Sekai (June).
Llmehara, Takeshi, and Kazuo Hanihara
1982 Ainu wa Gennihonjin ka (Are the Ainu protoJapanese?). Tokyo: Shogakukan.
United States National Museum
1891 United States National Museum Annual Report for
1889-90. Washington, D C. U S. Govern¬
ment Printing Office.
LItagawa, Hiroshi
1977 Hokkaido no kokogaku (Archaeology of
Hokkaido). Sapporo: Hokkaido Shuppan
Kikaku Senta.
1980a Aimi kokogaku (Archaeology of the Ainu).
Tokyo: Kyoiku Sha.
1980b Aimi bunka seiritsushi (History of the
development of Ainu culture). Sapporo:
Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Senta. Reprint,
1988
1989 lyomante no kokogaku (Archaeology of
iyomante). Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
1992 "The 'Sending Back' Rite in Ainu Culture."
Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 19, no. 2-3:
225-70

BIBLIOGRAPHY
403

Vallois, Henri V.
1967 Les races humaims. 7th ed. Paris: Presses
universitaires de France.
VanStone, James W.
1993 "The Ainu group at the Louisiana Purchase Expe¬
dition, 1904." Arctic Anthropology 30, no. 2: 77-91
Varenius, Bernhardus
1649 Dcscriptio retjni Iaponiae: cum cjuibusdam affirms
materiae, ex variis auctoribus collecta et in ordinarum
redacta. Amsterdam; Ludovicum Elzevirium.
Vasil'evskii, Ruslan Sergeevich
1998 "Fishing as an Early Form of Maritime
Adaptation on the Pacific Coast of Northeast
Asia." Arctic Anthropology 35, no. 1: 281-95.
Virchow, Rudolf
1880 "Bemerkungen zu: Georg Schlesinger,
Fundbericht uber die Ausgrabung eines
Ainoschadels auf Yezo" (Remarks on Georg
Schlesinger, report on the excavation of an Ainu
skull on Yezo). Zeitscbrftfiir Ethnologie 12: 207-209.
Vivien, L. de Saint Martin
1872 "Les Ainou" (The Ainu). In Lanneegeograpbigue,
revue anneulle des voyages de terre et mer. Vol. 9 and 10.
Paris: Librairie Hachette et cie.
Voss, Fritz
1993 "Philipp Franz von Siebold and the Ainu
Language." In European Studies on Ainu Language and
Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 63-80. Monographien
6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fiir Japanstudien
der Philipp-Franz-von-Siebold-Stiftung.
Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
Wada, Kan
1959 "Karafuto Ainu no guzo" (The religious figurines
of the Sakhalin Ainu). Hoppo Bunka Kenkyu
Hokoku 14.
1965 "lmu ni kansuru jakkan no mondai" (Some
problems concerning imu). Minzokugaku Kenkyu
29, no. 3: 263-71.
1996 "Some Shamanistic Features of Ainu Religion."
In Shamanism and Northern Ecology, ed. Juha
Pentikaeinen, 305-1 I. Berlin and New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Walker, Brett L
1996 "Reappraising the Sakoku Paradigm: The Ezo
Trade and the Extension of Tokugawa Political
Space into Hokkaido." Journal of Asian History 30,
no. 2; 169.
1997 Matsumae Domain and the Conquest of Ainu Lands:
Ecology and Culture in Tokugawa Expansionism,

1593-1799. Ph D. dissertation, Department of
History, University of Oregon.
Warthol, Walter
1993 "Ainu Collections at the Museum of Ethnology
(Museum fiir Volkerkunde, Wien)." In European
Studies on Ainu Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner,
193-206. Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen
Institut fur Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-vonSiebold-Stiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
Watanabe, Hitoshi
1963 "Ainu no nawabari toshiteno sake no
sanrankuiki" (Spawning grounds of dog salmon
and the Ainu local group territories). In
Minzokugaku nolo. Oka Masao Kyoju kanreki kitten
ronbunshu (Writing on anthropology: Professor
Oka Masao papers published on his 60th
birthday), 278-98. Tokyo: Heibonsha.
1964a "Ainu no seitai to honpo senshigaku mondai"
(Ecology of the Ainu and problems in prehistory
in Japan). Jinruigaku Zasshi 72, no. 1: 9-23.
1964b "Ainu no kumamatsuri no shakaiteki kino
narabini sono hatten ni kansuru seitaiteki yoin"
(Social functions of the Ainu bear ceremony and
ecological factors for its development).
Minzokugaku Kenkyu 29, no. 3: 206-17.

404

1968 "Subsistence and Ecology of Northern Food
Gatherers with Special Reference to the Ainu."
In Man the Hunter, ed. Richard B. Lee and Irven
DeVore, 69-77. Chicago: Aldine.
1972 "The Source of Ainu Culture: Especially its
Relationship with the Okhotsk Culture" (in
Japanese). Kokogaku Zasshi 60, no. 1: 72-82.
1973 The Ainu Ecosystem: Environment and Group Structure.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
1980 "Okunai seikatsu kukan no sei/zoku (otoko/
onna) nibunseia: Hokkaido senshi bunka to Ainu
bunnka no kankei ni tsuiteno dozokukokogakuteki mondaiten" (Spiritual/secular: Man/
woman division system of indoor living space:
Folklore and archaeological problems concerning
the relationship between Hokkaido prehistoric
and Ainu cultures). In Raitokoro-gawa Iseki
(Raitokoro remains), ed. Tokyo Daigaku Bungakubu, 85-97. Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
1983 "Occupational Differentiation and Social
Stratification: The Case of Northern Pacific
Maritime Food-Gathering." Current Anthropology
24, no, 2: 217-19.
1986 "Implementation of Primitive Agriculture:
Community Habitation and Food Gathering in
Prehistoric Japan." In Windows on the Japanese Past:
Studies in Archaeology and Prehistory, ed. Richard J.
Pearson, 229-54. Ann Arbor: Center for
Japanese Studies, University of Michigan.
1990a "Hoppo shuryosaishumin no seizan shinko: Ainu
o chushin tosuru kinoteki gaikan" (Huntergatherers’ belief in sacred mountains and its
ritual function among the Ainu). Hoppo sbobunka
ni kansuru bikaku kenkyu (A comparative study of
northern cultures), ed. Yoshinobu Kotani, 23779. Nagoya: Nagoya Daigaku Kyoyobu.
1990b Jomon-shiki kaisoka shakai (jomon stratified
society). Tokyo: Rokko Shuppan.
1992 "Hokuyo engan bunkken: Shuryo-saishu min
bunnka no kyotsusei to sono kaishaku mondai"
(Northern sea-coastal cultural zone: Common
elements of hunter-gatherer cultures and
problems in interpretation). In Kitano gengo
Ruikei to rekishi (Languages of the North.
Classification and history), ed. Hakuto
Miyaoka, 67-107. Tokyo: Sanseido.

Yamagishi, Norifumi
1996 "Ezochi yakubutsu shi" (History of drugs in
Ezo). In Hokkaido no iryo. Sono ayumi (Medical
treatment in Hokkaido: Its history), ed Nihon
Ishigaku Kenkyukai, 82-85. Sapporo: Hokkaido
Ishigaku Kenkyukai.
Yamaguchi, Bin
1962 "On the Ainu" (in Japanese). Bulletin of the Kushiro
Museum 130: 71.
1967 A Comparative Osteological Study of the Ainu and the
Australian Aborigines. Human Biology series, no. 2,
Australian Aboriginal Studies, no. 10. Canberra:
Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
1973 "Ainu oyobi Nihonjin zugaino ganmen heitando
keisoku” (Facial flatness and measurements of
Ainu and Japanese crania). Bulletin of the National
Science Museum 16: 161-71.
1981

"Hokkaido no kojinkotsu" (Human skeletal
remains in Hokkaido). In Nihonjin (The
Japanese, vol. 1), ed. Tamotsu Ogata, 137-56.
Junruigaku koza. Tokyo. Yuzankaku.

Yamaguchi, Bin, Hajime Ishida, and H. Matsumura
1993 "On the Skeletal Remains of Kurile Ainu
Collected by the Late Kingo Hayashi." Memoirs
of the National Science Museum 26: 151-69.
Yamakawa, Tsutomu
1980 Ainu minzoku bunkasbi eno shiron (An essay on Ainu
cultural history) Tokyo: Miraisha.
1988 Ash o tsukuru Ainu minzoku (The Ainu and their
future). Tokyo: Miraisha.
Yamamoto, Yuko
1943 Karafuto Ainu nojukyo (Dwellings of the
Sakhalin Ainu). Kenchiku shinsho 10.
Tokyo: Sagami Shobo.
1944 Karafuto shizen minzoku no seikatsu (Aboriginal life
of Sakhalin Island). Tokyo: Sagami Shobo.
Yamaura, Kiyoshi
1980 "On the Relationships of the Toggle Harpoon
Heads Discovered on the Northwestern Shore
of the Pacific." Material Culture 35: 1-19.
1993

"Harpoon Heads of the Circum-Okhotsk Sea."
Hokkaido Archaeology 29: 9-20.

1998 "Sea-Mammal Hunting Cultures of the Okhotsk
Sea with Special Reference to Hokkaido
Prehistory." Arctic Anthropology 35, no. 1 321-34.

Watanabe, Yu
1992 "Ainu no kaijyu shuryo" (Sea-mammal hunting
by the Ainu). Hokkaidoritsu Hokuho Minzoku
Hakubutsukan Kenkyu Kiyo, no. 1.

Yasumoto, Biten
1972 "Nihongo no tanjo" (The birth of the Japanese
language). Sun Kagaku (February-October).

West, Frederick Hadleigh (ed.)
1996 American Beginnings: The Prehistory and Palaeoecology of
Beringia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

1985 Nihongo no kigen o saguru (Searching for the origin
of the Japanese language). Tokyo: PHP
Institute.

White, Richard
1983 The Roots of Dependency: Subsistence, Environment, and

Yokoyama, Eisuke
1990 Satsumon bunka (Satsumon culture). Tokyo: Nyu
Saiensu Sha.

Social Change among the Choctaws, Pawnees, and
Navajos. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

Wilkinson, Jane
1993 "A Scottish Doctor's Vocation: Gordon Munro
and the Ainu Collections at the National
Museums of Scotland." In European Studies on Ainu
Language and Culture, ed. Josef Kreiner, 153-66.
Monographien 6 aus dem Deutschen Institut fur
Japanstudien der Philipp-Franz-von-SieboldStiftung. Munich: ludicium-Verlag.
Yamada, Hidezo
1983 Ainugo cbimei no kenkyu (Study of Ainu place-names).
Yamada Hidezo chosakttshu 4 (Collected works of
Hidezo Yamada, vol. 4). Tokyo: Sofukan.
1984 Hokkaido no cbimei (Place-names in Hokkaido).
Sapporo: Hokkaido Shinbunsha.
Yamada, Takako, and Takashi Irimoto (eds.)
1997 Circumpolar Animism and Shamanism. Sapporo:
Hokkaido Daigaku.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Yoneda, Hideki (ed.)
1993 Gendai no Ainu mokucbo bunkaten 1993 (The
Contemporary Ainu Woodcarving Exhibition,
1993). Piratori: Nibutani Ainu Bunka
Hakubutsukan.
Yotsuji, Ichiro
1981 Ainu no mon'yo (Ainu design motifs).Tokyo:
Kasakura Shuppansha.
Yuki, Shoji
1980 Ainu sengen (The Ainu manifesto). Tokyo:
San'ichi Shobo.
Zelenin, Dmitrii K.
1936 "Kult ongonov v Sibiri: perezhitki totemizma v
ideologii sibirskikh narodov" (The cult of the
ongons in Siberia: Survivals of totemism in
ideology of the native Siberians). Trudy Institute/
Antropologii, Arkbeologii i Etnografii 14, no. 3.

Credits

Object Ownership Ownership or custodial

York (AMNH), the Brooklyn Museum of Art

authority for objects and materials illustrated in

(BMA), Buffalo Museum of Science (BMS), and

this book is indicated, where appropriate, in

the Milwaukee Public Museum (MPM) were

parentheses at the end of each caption entry.

taken by Susan Einstein,- photographs of

Abbreviations used in this book are listed here

objects from the Field Museum of Natural

in alphabetical order: ACM, Asahikawa City

History, Chicago (FMC) and the National

Museum, AMMCA, Ainu Memorial Museum at

Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.

Chikabumi, Asahikawa,- AMNH, American

(NMNH) were taken by Dana Levy. Photo¬

Museum of Natural History, AMS, Ainu

graphs of objects from all remaining North

Museum at Shiraoi; BMA, Brooklyn Museum of

American institutions were taken by their

Art, BMS, Buffalo Museum of Science,- BMV,

respective photographic departments:

Berlin Museum fiir Volkerkunde,- FMC, Field

American Museum of Natural History by Jackie

Museum of Natural History, HACRC,

Beckett,- Harvard University Peabody Museum

Hokkaido Ainu Culture Research Center,-

by Hillel Burger,- Peabody Essex Museum by

HACRIC, Hokkaido Archaeological and

Mark Sexton and Jeffrey Dykes,- Llniversity of

Cultural Remains Investigation Center,

Pennsylvania Museum by Charles S. Kline,- and

Sapporo,- HAMA, Hokkaido Asahikawa

Royal Ontario Museum. Except as noted below,

Museum of Art,- HSKC, Hokkaido Shuppan

all photographs of objects from Japanese

Kikaku Center HMCAS, Hokkaido Museum of

institutions and collections were taken by the

Contemporary Art, Sapporo,- HMH, Historical

respective organizations and/or individuals.

Museum of Hokkaido, HML, Hakodate

Ethnographic Photographs: Unless otherwise

Municipal Library, HMM, Hakodate Municipal

noted, ethnographic field photographs are from

Museum, HOVO, Hokkaido Otoineppu Village

the Bronislaw Pilsudski (1902-05), Romyn

Office,- HPGBE, Hokkaido Prefectural

Hitchcock (1888), Carleton Coon (containing

Government Board of Education, Sapporo,-

Jesse Tarbox Beals photographs of Ainu at the

HUL Hokkaido Llniversity Library, Sapporo,

St. Louis Exposition in 1904), and Sister Inez

KM, Kitanihon Mingeisha Company, Ltd.,

Hilger (1965) collections in the National

Sapporo,- MIHPP, Museum of the Institute of

Anthropological Archives (NMNH),

History, Philosophy, and Philology, Novosibirsk,
MKB, Museum der Kulturen, Basel,- MPM
Milwaukee Public Museum,- NACM, Nibutani
Amu Culture Museum, NME, National Museum
of Ethnology, Osaka, NMNH, National
Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian

Smithsonian Institution
Ainu-e Illustrations: Photographs of all Ainu-e
illustrations except those owned by the National
Museum of Natural History and the Peabody
Essex Museum were taken by Susumu Tameoka
of the Historical Museum of Hokkaido.

Institution, NPS/LNHS, National Park Service,
Longfellow National Historic Site, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, PEM, Peabody Essex Museum,
PMC, Peabody Museum of Harvard Llniver¬
sity, ROM, Royal Ontario Museum UML,
University of Massachusetts W. E. B. DuBois
Library,- SOTD, Sapporo Otani Tanki
Daigaku, UA/UAFM, Llniversity of Alaska
Museum, Fairbanks,- L1PM, Llniversity of

Other Credits: Credits to individuals or
organizations for photographs taken, materials
produced or provided, and other courtesies
proffered in the production of this book are
listed below alphabetically with pertinent
figure numbers:
Ainu Association of Hokkaido: 7.3 (Shizunai
Branch), 14.1,49.2, 50.1, 51.2

Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and
Anthropology, RTBE, Rausu Town Board of
Education, SC, Sankyo Company,- SKRM,
Sakhalin Regional Museum, YuzhnoSakhalinsk, SM, Shin Mouri,- TNM, Tokyo
National Museum, UMA, University of
Massachusetts Archive,- WMCR Whyte
Museum of the Canadian Rockies.
Maps and graphics: Maps and graphics were
produced or adapted by Marcia Bakry of the
Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural
History from authors' drafts, originals, or

Ainu Museum at Shiraoi: 1.31, 24.1-6,- 30.2,
31.1-2, 31.5, 31.7, 31.10-1 1, 35.6, 35.11-12,
35.14, 37.7, 38.3, 38.6, 38.9, 38.15, 41.7,
44.3, - see also Kodama AMS illustrations.
American Museum of Natural History Archives:
15.3, 22.1-2 (courtesy of Ann Wright Parsons)
Asahikawa City Museum: 23.1, 23.5-6, 23.8-9,
47.4-6
Ted Banks III, Museum der Kulturen, Basel,
Carl Schuster Archive, courtesy of Edmund
Carpenter: 26.1,35.1

published materials.

Jesse Tarbox Beals: 1.16, 18.4-7, 44.1

Reprints: We thank Princeton Llniversity Press

Felice Beato, courtesy of Fong Chow: 27.2

for permission to reprint the excerpt (p. 28 1)

Berlin Museum fiir Volkerkunde: 43.4

from Songs of Gods, Songs of Humans by Donald
Philippi (1979).
Object Photographs Llnless otherwise

Brooklyn Museum of Art Archives: 9.5, 20.1-2
Anatoli Derevianko: 4.7

credited, photographs of objects from the

Koji Deriha: 23.2-4, 23.7

American Museum of Natural History, New

Harold Dougherty, SI Photographic Services:

405

David Dubreuil: 15.1, 47.17, 47.21, 47.28, 49.4

Shigeru Kayano-. 43.4

47.15, 47.19, 47.22

Brian Fagan: 5.2

Isao Kikuchi: 8.1

P. Pantzer: 16.7

William W Fitzhugh: 1.2, 1.8, 1.23, 1.26, 6.2,

Toshihiko Kikuchi: 4.2

Princeton University Press: 40.2, courtesy of

1 1.5, 24.7

Masako Kinoshita: 55.3

the Kubodera family

Mie Haginaka: 14.3

Dai Kitagawa: 48.1, 48.3-4, 52.1

Royal Ontario Museum: 1.20

Hakodate Municipal Library: for providing

Tetsuo Kitaichi: 31.1

Douglas Sanders: 47.20

Yoshikazu and Michi Kitao: 1 19, 2.10, 9.36,

Sankyo Company: 47.34-35

many Ainu-e illustrations
Hakodate Municipal Museum: 9.4
Harold Dougherty, Carl Hansen, Don
Hurlbert, and Laurie Penland (SI Photo¬
graphic Services), courtesy of Valerie Shubin
and Olga A. Shubina of SK.RM: 4.3-4, 4.10

15.4, 42.14, 45.29

Shiro Sasaki: 10.1-2

Motomichi Kono: 15.2

Mary Schaffer: 45.16

Josef Kreiner: 16.1-5, 16.7-10

Richard Siddle: 7.5, 7.6, 7.7

Kyoryokukai: The Corporation in Aid of the

Frederick Starr: 18.3 (courtesy of Y. Kotani

Tokyo National Museum Management: 43.4
Sister Inez HiIger (note: Hilger Collection
photographs were largely taken by photogra¬
phers who accompanied Sister Hilger during
her travels in Hokkaido, including some who
worked for National Geographic magazine and
Japanese photographers,- attributions for
specific photographs are not given in the

Kodanta Collection, Ainu Museum at Shiraoi:

Sekiguchi Tadashi: 16.4

6.6, 10.3, 13.2, 32.5, 34.6, 38.6, 45.3, 45.5d,

Suzuko Tamura: 6 1,6.4

45.8, 45.9-1 1,45.13-15, 45.19-20, 45.28,

Hiroshi Tateno: 1.30, 30.7, 47.9, 47.11,47.12
Library of Congress, Kimbei photograph, Lot
12548: 27.5
Stephen Loring: 49.6

48.2, 48.5, 49.3, 50.2-3, 51 I, 52.2, 55.5

Yonu Makino, courtesy of Fosco Maraini 46.14

Historical Museum of Hokkaido: in addition to
Ainu-e photographed by Susumu Tameoka,
HMH archaeological objects were photo¬
graphed by Susumu Tameoka (Chapters 3,4)
and ethnographic photographs were made by
Koji Deriha (23.2-4, 23.7),- 32.1, 36.3, 42.1
Hokkaido Ainu Culture Research Center: 28.4
Hokkaido Asahikawa Museum of Art: 47.27
Hokkaido Shuppan Kikaku Center: 47.33,
47.37, 47.36
Hokkaido Shinbun; 14.5—6,47.23
Hokkaido University Library, Sapporo: 8.2, 41.4
Human Studies Film Archive, NAA, NMNH/
SI: 25.1-2

Fosco Maraini: 1.1 3, 46.2, 46.48, 46.10-12,
46.14
Kitamhon Mingeisha: 47.3, 47.10, 47.14,
47.16, 47.26
Shin Mouri: 11.4
Miyuki Muraki: 34.6

Tokyo National Museum: 9.1-3, 9.6, 43.5
Hiroaki Tsuda: 42.14
Nobuko Tsuda: 44.5, 44.7
Christy G. Turner IF 5.3, 5.4
Llmted Nations (UN/DPI) photo 182264 by
E Debebe: 49.1
Llniversity of Alaska Museum, Fairbanks,
courtesy of Molly Lee: 43.8
Llniversity of Massachusetts, Special Collec¬
tions and Archives, W. E. B. DuBois Library,

Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography, St.

Benjamin Smith Lyman Papers: 14.4, 27.1-2

Petersburg, Russia: 1.23, 1.26, 17.1-3
Llniversity of Oregon Library Archives,
Museum of Contemporary Art, Sapporo: 47.18,
47.24-25
National Museum of Natural History
(Smithsonian) Botany Library: 29.17
National Park Service, Henry Wadsworth

courtesy of Y. Kotani: 18.3
Llniversity of Pennsylvania Museum of
Archaeology and Anthropology Archives:
21.1-2, 21.5-7, 31.3, 31.10, 45.12, 45.16
Hitoshi Watanabe: 27.4

Longfellow National Historic Site: 8.3, 10.6,
29.2

Hajime Ishida: 5.5

Masahiro Nomoto: 55.4

Cenichiro Kakegawa: 55.1

Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka: 1.18, 11.2, 11.3,53.1—3

Adria Katz: 21.3

Yugo Ono: 2.1-3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6-7, 2.9, 2.11,2.12

Noriko Kawamura: 47.29-32

Otoineppu Village Office, Hokkaido: 1.19,

406

Kazunon Tarumi: 47.1 3

45.34

Hilger papers in the NAA): 1 1.1, 26.7, 41.8,

kumo Hirashima: 55.2

and University of Oregon Library)

Hideki Yoneda: 49.5, 54.1-2
Washington Evening Star: 114

(The assistance of Keith Ward in compiling
this list is much appreciated.)

Acknowledgments

Exhibitions, like human lives, have special meaning and special histories. They are born of
dreams, take inspiration from their surroundings, and in the process of becoming what they will
be, they develop new voices and goals, sometimes surprising their parents and sponsors. Aitnt:
Spirit of a Northern People is no exception. The exhibition and this catalogue are as different from its
original concept as a butterfly from its pupa. As tempting as it is to provide a project history, that
shall have to await another venue. Here we must be limited to a roll call of thanks to the many
organizations and individuals whose efforts and assistance made this project possible.
At the outset we wish to thank those who contributed in many ways, large and small: the
many Ainu people who provided hospitality, assistance, and ideas to Chisato and David Dubreuil
in their several planning trips to Hokkaido,- to Japanese and American scholars who participated
in exchange visits to Japan and the United States in the mid-1990s,- to those organizations that
supported the Japanese Ainu Collection Documentation Project (ACDP) Teams research
programs in Europe, North America, and Russia,- Smithsonian employees who provided logistic
and administrative support throughout this venture,- and many others too numerous to name
As reported elsewhere in this volume, this project grew out of discussions between
Yoshinobu Kotani and William Fitzhugh in 1991 when the Japanese ACDP was conducting an
inventory of Ainu collections in North American museums, expanding upon previous research of
the Smithsonian's collections conducted by Kazuyoshi Ohtsuka and Chang-su Houchins a few
years earlier. The idea of drawing together these little-known North American Ainu resources was
further developed by Kotani and members of the ACDP team with Amy Poster (Brooklyn
Museum of Art), Laurel Kendall (American Museum of Natural History), Stephen Loring (Arctic
Studies Center, Smithsonian Institution), and Adria Katz (University of Pennsylvania Museum).
Major progress was made in 1992 when Kotani invited Fitzhugh to Japan to inspect collections at
Tokyo National Museum, Historical Museum of Hokkaido, and other institutions. Further
progress came with Fitzhugh's visit to Abashin in the fall of 1992, with Koji Deriha's studies at the
Smithsonian Institution, American Museum of Natural History, Brooklyn Museum of Art, and
University of Pennsylvania Museum in 1993 and 1994, and with Ainu Collection Documentation
Project meetings and seminars that took place in Washington, New York, and Philadelphia in
1994 and 1995. Throughout our planning, the staffs of these four museums bore the burden of
hosting our work and later provided staff time for the processing, conservation, and photography
of ethnographic objects. Other North American museums who participated in this project include
Buffalo Museum of Science, Field Museum of Natural History, Milwaukee Public Museum,
Peabody Essex Museum, and Peabody Museum of Harvard University. We thank these institutions
and their staffs for their great contributions to the project, foremost being their generous object
and archival loans. We also thank the Ainu and Japanese museums and private collectors from
Japan for their most valuable contributions, without their objects and archival materials the "Ainu
story" would not be complete. They include Asahikawa City Museum, Ainu Museum at Shiraoi,
Hokkaido Ainu Cultural Research Center, Hokkaido Archaeological and Cultural Remains
Investigation Center in Sapporo, Hokkaido Asahikawa Museum of Art, Hokkaido Shuppan
Kikaku Center, Hokkaido Museum of Contemporary Art in Sapporo, Historical Museum of
Hokkaido, Hakodate Municipal Library in Sapporo, Hakodate Municipal Museum, Hokkaido
Otoineppu Village Office, Hokkaido Prefectural Government Board of Education in Sapporo,
Hokkaido University Library in Sapporo, Kitanihon Mingeisha Company, Ltd., of Sapporo,
Noriko Kawamura, Yoshikazu and Michi Kitao, National Museum of Ethnology, Mr. Shm Mouri,
Nibutani Amu Culture Museum, Rausu Town Board of Education, Sankyo Company, Sapporo
Otani Tanki Daigaku, Chinita Sunazawa, and Tokyo National Museum. Other international
museums and institutions that provided collections, archival materials, or information include
Berlin Museum fur Volkerkunde, Museum of History, Philosophy, and Philology in Novosibirsk,
Museum der Kulturen in Basel, Longfellow National Historic Site (Cambridge, Massachusetts) of
the United States National Park Service, University of Alaska Museum in Fairbanks, Sakhalin
Regional Museum in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, and Whyte Museum of the Canadian Rockies.
In addition to support provided to our Japanese colleagues by grants from the Monbusho
and other organizations and by our early Smithsonian sponsor, the Special Exhibition Fund (with
special thanks to Barbara Schneider), our primary project support came from The Nippon
Foundation in Tokyo. To Ms. Ayako Sono, Executive Director, and Mr. Yohei Sasakawa,
President, and Mr.Takashi Ito and Mr. Yasunobu Ishii of the Nippon Foundation we owe a great
debt of gratitude for their early recognition of the worth of our efforts. Tyane C. Benson was
instrumental in helping us to gain initial access to the Sasakawa Peace Foundation in Washington,
D C., a subsidiary of The Nippon Foundation in Tokyo. Important project support was also
provided by The Japan Foundation through the assistance of Hayato Ogo, Councilor, Triennale
Planning Office, Arts Department., Tokyo office in the Foundation's New York office, Natsuo
Amemiya, Former Director, Masaya Usuda, Director General,- Michiko Hirano, Assistant
Director,- and Christopher A. Watanabe, Program Assistant. From Nippon Express Co., Ltd., we
thank Kazuyoshi Takahashi, Advisor, Fine Arts Groups, and Satoru Ishii, Manager, Sapporo Fine
Arts Center. We received generous transportation support from All Nippon Airways Co., Ltd.
(ANA). From the ANA staff we thank Takeshi Muto, Deputy General Manager, Sapporo Sales
Office,- Yoshiyuki Fukumuro, Senior Manager, Cargo and Mail Sales, Sapporo Sales Office,- and

407

Shigeyuki Takemura, Manager, Passenger Sales, Washington, D.C. office. We also thank British
Airways, as well as Ralph Samuelson, Director, and Sarah Bradley, Associate Director, of the Asian
Cultural Council in New York for their assistance in bringing Masahiro Nomoto to the
Smithsonian for exhibition production and curatorial assistance.
Valuable services were also provided to the exhibition and the publication by Karoku Miwa,
Former Councilor on Cultural Properties, Cultural Properties Protection Department, Akio
Oshima, Investigator for Cultural Properties, Cultural Properties Protection Department, Tatsuo
Kishi, Coordinator for International Cooperation for Cultural Properties, Cultural Properties
Protection Office,- and Kiyohito Ueno, Specialist on Cultural Properties, Cultural Properties
Protection Department of the Agency for Cultural Affairs of Japan (Bunka-cho). We also thank
Satoru Shirano, Naotoshi Kimura, and Yoshihito Oda from the Cultural Division, Board of
Education of Hokkaido Prefectural Government, as well as Jiro Sasamura, Executive Director,
Takeshi Toyama, Secretary General, Yukio Sato, Deputy Secretary General, and the staff of Utari
Kyokai, The Ainu Association of Hokkaido. Kazuyuki Tanimoto, Director, and the staff of the
Ainu Culture Research Center in Hokkaido, provided assistance in Ainu culture research and
object loans of contemporary fine art. Equally important was the staff of the Historical Museum of
Hokkaido: Kazuo Yoshida, Director, Norio Mino, Director of the Curatorial Department, Hiroshi
Ushiro, Hideshi Seki, and Susumu Tameoka. Hiroko Tani, Director, Cultural Promotion Depart¬
ment, City of Sapporo,- Tekeshi Asaji, Head of Curatorial Section, Osaka Human Rights Museum,Giichi Nomura, Executive Director, and Tadashi Takahashi, The Association for the Transmission
and Maintenance of Ainu Intangible Culture,- Minoru Mark Furuyama, General Manager, Sasakawa
Peace Foundation USA, and Mark J. Davidson, former Director, Sapporo American Center, United
States Information Services.
Special thanks are due to Dr. Eric J. Gangloff, Executive Director, and Margaret P. Mihori,
Program Officer of the Japan-United States Friendship Commission,- The Nippon Foundation,- and
The Japan Foundation for financial assistance specifically devoted to the production of this
catalogue. Special thanks also go to Mr. Kazuyuki Yamamaru, The Ainu Museum, Shiraoi,
Hokkaido, for his extremely valuable support which enabled Masahiro Nomoto to come to
Washington, D.C. to work on the exhibition at the Smithsonian's Office of Exhibits Central. The
staff of the Office of Exhibits Central, under the direction of Michael Headley, are an incredibly
talented group of artists who produced the exhibition's fine chise (dwelling), iyomank (bear
ceremony), and itaomachip (boat) re-creations with the assistance of Masahiro Nomoto, Jonathan
Zastrow, Carolyn Thome, Lora Collins, Carol Reuter, Danny Fielding, John Siske, Paul Rhymer,
Tim Smith, Robert Patterson, Rob Wilcox, Victor Augustine, Hugh Bennett, Sarah Strachan, Pat
Chirichella, David Clements, Robert Perantoni, William Walton, James Carr, and Harry Adams.
Our heartfelt thanks go to the authors who contributed essays to this catalogue. We wish
especially to thank Nobuhiro Kishigami, Shinko Ogihara, Kazuo Okada, Hiroshi Ushiro, and
Kiyoshi Yamaura. In addition, we want to recognize the very valuable assistance of the Ainu
people, who were extremely helpful, including G iichi Nomura, Jiro Sasamura, Shigeru Kayano,
Shiro Kayano, Kenichi Kawanuira, Mitsuru Sugimura, Fusa Sugimura, Akira Toko, Emi Toko,
Fukiko Toko, Midori Toko, Kazuo Sunazawa, Toyojiro Shitaku, Kiyoshi Hikawa, Kenji Matsuda,
Koichi Kaizawa, Mamoru Kaizawa, Maki Kaizawa, Kaoru Kaizawa, Katsue Kaizawa, Soshichi
Kawanano, Kyoko Kosaka, Machiko Kato, Sanae Ogawa, Hitomi Yokoyama, Mutsumi Chiri,
Nuburi Toko, Imakichi Akibe, Susumu Sawai, Shigeko Teshi, Akira Toko, Masao Nishida,
Torakichi Shimizu, Ichiro Sasamura, Noboru Ozeki, Tsuda Ozeki, Tomeno Sawai, Hiroaki Honda,
Tomoko Oda, Tadashi Hiroo, Morio Senke, Mutsuko Nakamoto, Tokuhei Akibe, Takakichi
Ogawa, Aku Sawai, Susumu Sawai, Harumitsu Sawai, Yoshizi Ishii, Haruzo Akita, Oki Kano, and
Mitsunori and Tomoko Keira, and special recognition to the Ainu artists who loaned their artwork:
Takeki Fujito, Kazuo Sunazawa, Noriko Kawamura, and Chinita Sunazawa. We must also mention
Makoto Kawakami from Otoineppu, Hokkaido, who helped us obtain the loan of most of Bikky
Sunazawa's artworks,- Katsumi Yazaki, Motoko and Si Spiegel,- Fong Chow,- Jim Shea of the
National Park Service's Longfellow National Historic Site,- Yoshiko Tanigaki and the Japanese
Group in Buffalo,- Hideki Yoneda of the Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum,- Yuichi Uchida, Associate
Curator at the Obihiro Centennial City Museum,- Yutaka Watanabe, Curator, and Reiko Saito,
Assistant Curator, of the Hokkaido Museum of Northern Peoples, Tsukasa Ejiri and Yosuke Kosaka
of Hokkaido Shimbun,- Makoto and Itsuko Ishihara of Sapporo-do Shoten,- Liz Hill, publicist,- Verna
Curtis, Curator of Photography, Library of Congress,- Shigehiro and Keiko Takano,- Takao
Yokoyama,- Yasuhiro Murai,- Motomichi Kono,- Shinobu Ishijima,- Miwako Kaizawa,- and Masayuki
and Chieko Inoue.
Marc Pachter and Smithsonian Secretary Michael Heyman provided crucial assistance at
several stages in our negotiations with Japanese authorities. Above all, we thank the Smithsonian's
coordinator in Tokyo, Hanako Matano, for her role as "mother hen" to the Japanese side of our
project, Ainu: Spirit of a Northern People could not have been "hatched" without her deft touch. It was
through her efforts that we were able to work so effectively with Mr. Karoku Miwa, former councilor
for Cultural Properties at the Bunka-cho,- Mr. Kazuyoshi Takahashi and Mr. Satoru Ishii at Nippon
Express,- and Dr. Makoto Sahara of the Japanese Museum of History, Sakura.
Many aspects of this book were facilitated by the team that produced the exhibition,

408

including Robert M. Malootian and Leslie Geer of tire Douglas/Gallagher design firm, writer Sue
Voss, registrar Deborah A. Wood, and conservator Edith Dietz. Support from the National
Museum of Natural History collection and administration programs came from Deborah Hull Walski, Greta Hansen, Dennis Stanford, Carolyn Rose, Carole Lee Kin, Joyce Somers, Kim
Waters, and Zaborian Payne. Jodi Pettibone provided financial accountability for our funds
David Dubreuil, John Homiak, Paula Fleming, Gayle Yiotis, and Ruth Selig helped us obtain
photographs from the National Anthropological Archives, and Mark White and Daisy Njokti
helped us acquire archival footage. Maggie Dittemore and Carole Slatick provided library
support, and the Applied Data Processing Office—Richard Freeman, Kurt Luginbyhl, Kurt
Bruwelheide, and Robert Milo—solved frequent computer crises. Arctic Studies staff members
were everywhere heaving on the Ainu "windlass": Stephen Loring, Igor Krupnik, Carla Lovett,
and Daniel Odess, but no one more than Elisabeth Ward, who oversaw much of the archival
photograph selection and production for the exhibition, performed miracles with computer
support and bibliographic compilation, and generally held the ASC together during this period
The two films for the exhibition were produced by Jennifer Gruber and Tod Hopkins of
Hillmann & Carr, Inc., and Ted Timreck Productions. Those who contributed film and music for
the productions include Toei Video Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Hokkaido Broadcasting, Co., Ltd.,
Sapporo, Yay Yukar no Mori, Sapporo, and NMNH, Smithsonian Institution. Music was
provided by Oki Kano and Katayama Institute of Linguistic and Cultural Research, and still
photographs were provided by David H Dubreuil
Curatorial assistance was provided by the many scholars already mentioned, but especially
by Adria Katz, Laurel Kendall, and Amy Poster, who were our principal museum partners and
advisors in the early stage of the project, along with Josef Kreiner, Yoshinobu Kotani, and
Toshikazu Sasaki Entiko Ohnuki-Tierney provided ethnological advice in early conceptual
development,- David Dubreuil, David Howell, Richard Siddle, and Kelly Dietz advised on
historical matters,- Christy Turner, Douglas Llbelaker, and David Hunt helped with issues of
biological relationships, Igor Krupnik performed valuable editorial and bibliographical work,
and Sergei Arutiunov provided depth in anthropological history We would like to recognize
Chang-su Houchins for her unofficial role as project "godmother" in providing nearly continu¬
ous scholarly support, advice, and good humor as we ventured into unfamiliar terrain outside our
respective fields in arctic anthropology and native art history We thank her and the other
project scholars who generously and expeditiously provided manuscripts, comments, text
reviews, and consolation on short notice, including James VanStone To Laurel Kendall and
Adria Katz we also owe a major debt for their assistance with the development of an early
version of the exhibition plan
Book production services included translations provided by Shue Sei, Chisato Dubreuil,
Ritsuko Howson, and Tetsuro Komatsu, editors Tish O'Connor and Sherri Schottlaender, assisted
by Brenda Johnson-Grau, brought consistency and stylish grace to this multifaceted manuscript.
Theresa Valasquez and Darlene Hamilton executed Dana Levy's typography. The bibliography
was compiled by Chisato Dubreuil, Igor Krupnik, Megumi Lincoln, and Elisabeth Ward, and
edited by Sherri Schottlaender. Many of the illustrations were drawn or adapted by Marcia Bakry.
Object photographs were made by Dana Levy and Susan Einstein and by photographers of various
lenders (see Credit List). Photographic support came from the OPPS/NMNH photo staff: Carl
Hansen, Victor Krantz, John Steiner, Don Hurlbert, and Harold Dougherty. Felicia Page kept the
photo files in good order. Sandy Thomas-Belamy negotiated our editorial and design team
contract,- Karen Goldman helped with the marketing sales contract, and Norma Ryan handled
Smithsonian sales shop merchandising
Our final comments are reserved for a group of people so central to the success of the Ainu
project that they will forever be etched into the walls of our mental "Ainu Project Hall of Fame":
Marjory Stoller and Joe Madeira, our delightful exhibit production partners, who maintained faith
in our prospects through thick and thin, Letitia Burns O'Connor and Dana Levy of Perpetua Press,
Los Angeles, who edited and designed a book so beautiful that it took us all by surprise,- and David
Dubreuil, a "can-do" guy who during the course of the project, performed nearly every function
imaginable, from curator to project manager, fund-raiser to popularist, photographer to proofer,
strategist to catechist, and also posed as one of our exhibition mannequin figures. Another
mannequin model was Masahiro Nornoto, who with the assistance of Smithsonian's Office of
Special Exhibits, was the model builder of the itaomachip (seagoing boat), cbise (the full-sized Ainu
house), a scene from an iyomante (the bear-sending ceremony), and the maw maker. Without his
artistry, the exhibition would have had much different look.
Two other people need mentioning: Lynne Fitzhugh, whose tolerance of her husband's
domestic absence was counterbalanced by her commitment to hospitality and support for our
overworked Ainu team, and again, David Dubreuil, who left his career to join his wife on her
vision quest to bring the Ainu to the attention of millions of museum visitors and readers of this
volume. To everyone: thank you

409

Index

A
Activism. See Indigenous rights movement
Adoption, 272
Agriculture. See Farming, Horticulture

Figures are identified in boldface type by
page number.
Only when necessary for identification
are figure numbers also given
Figures may be additionally notated as
"m" for map, and "t" for table.
Figure captions are included as part of the
text.
When both text and figures refer to
a topic, they are listed separately

Ainu-e (Japanese paintings of the Ainu), 1 3, 67, 79-85, at
Ainu Museum in Shiraoi, 185-186, featured, 79, 80,
82, 247(34.6), 253(35.12), 302(43.3), 375. Set also
by artist (Arai, Hakuseki, Chitei, Hata no, Hirasawa,
Byozan, Kakizaki, Hakyo; Kodama, Teiryo,- Mamiya,
Rinzo, Murakami, Shimanojo,- Nishikawa, Hokuyo, and
others)
Ainu ethnicity, 9-12, 19-21, 136,• "enigma" of, 13-16,- as
a Northern people (ethnological comparisons), 23—24,
47-51, 116-123. See also Ainu origins, Linguistic
origins
Ainu history. See History of the Ainu
Ainu Kyokai, 73, 109, 111. See also Utari Kyokai
Amu language. See Language
Ainu Liberation League (Ainu Kaiho Domei), 1 13
Ainu Manners and Customs (Nishikawa), I 56(20.4),
207(28.13), 210, 237(32.8), 238(32.9-10),
250(35.4)
Amu mosir (homeland), 67, 69,72,92, 110, 114-115,227,
369, land claims to, 367. See also Hokkaido, Kurile
Islands, Sakhalin Island
Ainu Museum in Shiraoi, 26, 94, 183, 183-186, 223,233
Ainu origins: biological data, 52, craniological studies,
31, dental studies, 31,53-54, 54, 55; genetic and
morphological data, 52-54, 55-56, 56
-theories and models, 17-18, 29-31, 39, the Ainu
"race" theory, 52-53, Caucasoid hypothesis, 14-15,
15, 29-30, 53, 56, 61, 127, 137-138, 168, dual
structure model, 29, 55,- Jomon-Ainu relation, 30-31,
35-36, 53-56, Mongoloid cluster model, 53—55,
northern origins view, 47-51, 53-55 (Sec also
Northwest Coast peoples),- proto-Australoid
hypothesis, 31, race and evolution prevailing views
affecting, 52-53, 127,- southern origins view, 30. See
also Biological data on Ainu origins, Geographical
distribution and migrations, Hokkaido archaeology,
Linguistic origins,- Maps
Ainu people: as a northern people, 23-24, 47-51, 53-55,
ethnic groups, 29, 110, 1 19m, 120, 148, 213, 227,
337-338, 355, 377,- perceptions of, 125-127, 153-154
(See also Ainu-e; Photographs of Ainu), physical traits,
14, 17,51,53,77,125, I 40. See also Archaeological
cultures,- Emishi, Ezo, Hokkaido Ainu, Kurile Ainu,
Sakhalin Ainu
Ainurakkur myth, 275-276
Ainu Shinpo Act of 1997, 10, 25-26, 59, 73, 300, 373,indigenous rights movement for, 115, 361, 366-368,
370
Akino, Shigeki, 183-186, 248-255
Altar (misa), 164, 165, 199, 230, 256—260, 264
American Indians, 15, 16, 1 16-123, 279
American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) Ainu
collection, 168-175
Amulets, 104, 105, 262, 270, 270(38.6), 310(44.3)

Architecture, domestic. See Chise (house)
Archival collections. See Museum Ainu Collections
Arrows/arrowheads: flower arrows (heper-ay), 251(35.8),
295(42.1 3), 297-298, neolithic, 48, 49, poison
arrows, 78, 209, 21 1-21 3, 2 I 6(29.1 7-1 8). See also
Bows,- Quivers
Arts, 21-23, 181, 287, 299-300, incorporating foreign
elements ("making them Ainu"), 7, 19, 19-21,
322(45.23). See also Design elements, Performance
arts, Textile arts, Woodcamng
Arts, modern, 227, 339, 352-353, including taboo
images, 24 See also Fujito, Takeki, Kawamura, Noriko,
Sunazawa, Bikky, Sunazawa, Chimta
Arutiunov, Sergei A., 29-31, 132
Aryan hypothesis. See Caucasoid hypothesis
Asahikawa, 25, 110, 163m, 190, 337-338
Assimilation: Ainu early efforts, 73, 109-112,
government policies, 10, 14,70-73,74, 108, 140-141,
149, 184, 203. See also Japanese-Ainu relations
Attush (bark cloth), 16, 133, 152, 289, 317, 323(45.23)
Austronesian origin theory (linguistic), 64
Ayus (design motif), 14(1.12), 331(46.10)

B
Baba, Osamu Ainu collection, 179-180
Baelz, Erwin E., 29, 55, 126, 127
Baskets: archival record, 301-303, 303, basketry
techniques, 309-310, 311-312, 3 1 2, coiled (tenki), 23,
134(17.3), 304, 305, 305(43.7), 308, Japanese
influence on, 306, Kamchadal basketry, 303, 308;
North Pacific parallels in, I 16, 123, 301, 307-308,
twined (saramp), 16, 301, 302, 303-305, 305(43.8),
307-308, 310-31 1, 31 1
Batchelor, John, 15,29,61, 136(t), 142, 156, Ainu-EnglishJapanese Dictionary, 59, 265, 266, 327, 328, on Ainu
notions of disease, 103-104, missionary work with
Ainu, 109, 1 39—140
Beaded ornaments, 21, 22, 1 39, 158,1 79, 324, 325,
325
Beals, Jesse Tarbox, 16, 140, photographs of Ainu, 141,
142, 241, 309
Bear (kuma): care of cubs, 248-249, 250, 250,- carvings
of, 93-94, 273(38.14), 337, 337-339, 339(47.9),deity (kimun-kamuy), 21, 36, 43(3.1 1), 93, 1 87, 199,
201, 224, 248-250
Bear hunting, 36(2.8), 200, 201, 209-210, 219
Bear-sending ceremony. See Iyomante
Beautiful Japan (film), 187, 188, 188

Ancestors, 268, 275, ancestral grave rights, 1 15

Belief system, 228, 235, 328, 380-381, language and, 58,
North Coast parallels, 123. See also Ceremonies,Religion,- Shamanism; Social structure, Kamuy (spirit
deities)

Ancient Manners and Customs of Ezo, 278

Birdbone artifacts, 46

Animals: in epic stories (yukar), 276-277; stylized images
of, 12, 224, 332(46.1 2-1 3), paleolithic, 24m,
sacrifice, 25-26, 241-242, 249, 251,253, 263(37.3),
spirits of, 21, 24, 36, 39, 43(3.1 1), 93, 187, 199, 200,
201, 202, 224, 353(47.37) 252 See also hy individual
species

Bird, Isabella, 14, 333-334, 336

Anutari Ainu (We Human Beings), 113

Blood taboos, 244

Aoyagi, Nobukatsu, 175-182

Boat building, 235, 374-376

Arai, Hakuseki, Ezo-shi (Illustrated Gazetteer of Ezo), 79, 80,
81,82. See also Ainu-e

Boat-launching ceremony (chip-sanke), 356, 357, 362

Archaeological artifacts, 32, 39, 40, 41, 42-44, 46,
microlithic, 40, 48, neolithic arrows, 48, 49; tool
artifacts,48, 49, 51, shell-mound excavations, 52, 18,
126, 222, silver ornaments, 49, skeletons/skulls, 126,
165, 257-260, 264 See also Arrows/arrowheads. See also
Archaeological cultures

Boas, Franz, 1 16, 138, 169-170

Amur River, and region, 22-23, 39, 43, 46, 47-51,86, 86
Amur-Sakhalin expedition, 133

410

Archaeological cultures, 17, 32-35, 39-46, 302, in
Hokkaido, 33(2.7)m, 35-36, 39-46, 40(3.2), 48-49,
150-151, 165, 198, Jomon culture, 17, 18, 33, 40-42,
46, 123, 222, 303, Kurile Islands, 43-44, Okhotsk
culture, 18, 23, 43-44, 222, Sakhalin, 40(3.2), 46, 47,
49, Satsumon culture, 7, 18, 44—45, 205, Yayoi culture,
1 7(1.1 7), 42-44. See also Ice Age , Paleolithic land
bridges

Birds: eagle, 266, 340(47.1 I),- owl, 21, 38, 42, 252,
255; seabird eggs, 213
Birdskin robe, 3 I 6
Birth rites, 267-270

Boat (itaomachip), 186(24.7), 374, 375, 376

Bone carvings: birdbone, 46, ivory, I 70(22.3),
293(42.9); whalebone, 224
Bonn, University of, 128
Bows, 210(29.4), 212(29)

Brooklyn Museum of Art (BMA) Ainu collection, 155-161
Burial customs, 106, 158-159, 269, 272
Dam, Saru River, 37-38, 355-358, 356, 377. See also
Nibutani

c
Caucasoid hypothesis of Amu origins, 14-15, 15, 29-30,
53,56,61, 127, 137-138, 168, political uses, 130-131

Dancing, 184-185, 185, 188,281,282, 284-285,- for
animal spirits, 257, 282, 283-284,- stranded whale
dance, 223, 223(30.2), 226,- sword dance, 285(41.7)

Ceramics and pottery, artifacts, 40, 42, 43, 49, 53

Dead spirits, 193-194, 196-197. See also Death,- Kamuy
(spirit deities)

Ceremonial clothing, 239, 319(45.1 6), 322(45.22),
women's ritual belt, 232, 264-265

Dean, Bashford, 139, 169, 169-174, photographs of
Ainu, 1 68

Ceremonial cups (tuki), 21, 77, 178, 182,328(46.3,
46.5), 329-330

Death: burial customs, 106, 158-159, 269, 272, funeral
ceremonies, 268-269, 272-273,- spirit at, 193, 196—
197. See also Dead spirits, Reincarnation

Ceremonial headdress, men's (sapaunpe), 178,
295(42.12), 297-298, 323, 325-326

Eskimos: ethnological comparisons with Ainu, 22(1.26),
23, 47-51, linguistic comparisons with Ainu, 65, Yup'ik
basketry, 301, 305(43.8), 307, 307-308
Ethnic Culture Film Research Institute, 191
Ethnic identity. See Cultural identity
Ethnicity. See Ainu ethnicity
Ethnographic films, 187-191
Ethnological collections. See Museum Ainu collections
European Ainu collections, 127, 127-131, 128(t), 129,
1 3 1 m, Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology
(MAE), 128, 132(t), 132-135, 133
Europoid theory. See Caucasoid hypothesis of Ainu
origins

Death mask, 42

Evolutionist school, 127

Ceremonies: and belief system, 194-197, 201, 231, 297,
blessing ritual, 9(1.2),- chip-sanke (boat launching), 356,
357, 362,- first salmon ceremony, 24, 36, 36, 118, 119,
200, 219, 221, 253,- harvest ceremonies, 237, hunting
rites, 219-220, sake drinking, 21, 135, 77, 178, 182,
264, 297, 328. See also Festivals,- Sending ceremonies,
Kamuy (spirit deities)

Deer hunting, 37, 156(20.4), 200, 209(29.3), 210

Exhibitions, 93, 129, 153, 154, 164, live "exhibits," 16,
16, 1 30-131, 142, 142, St Louis Exposition, 140-142,
155, 159, 309

Chamberlain, Basil Hall, 62, 65, 142
Chieftains, 9, 83-84, 287: Ainu-e portraits of (Kakizaki),
8, 18, 28, 28, 37, 66, 83, 122, 124, 192, 286, 354
Chikabumi, 163m, 338
Chikap, Mieko, 1 15
Childhood, 64, 246-247, 271,288, children's clothing,
142, 288, 320
Chinese-Ainu contacts, 68, 75, 87-91,86(10.2),- Qing
Dynasty, 86-88. See also Santan trade
Cbip-sanke (boat-launching ceremony), 356, 357, 362

Deer-sending ceremonies, 253-254
Deforestation, 37, 38m, 356
Deities. See Spirit deities

Expeditions, 125, 133, 136, 140, I63ni, 167,-Jesup North
Pacific Expedition, 63, 116, 138, 169, 170

Demographic factors. See Population

Exports, 93, 93-94

Deriha, Koji, 176-182

Expositions. See Exhibitions

Design elements: 13, 143, 118, 153(19.1) 195, 239,
244(33.8),- 320-321, 321 (45.1 9-20), abstract
symbols (shiroshi), 332(46.12-1 3), bird images (ayus),
14(1.12), 331 (46.10); "Escher-like" positive-negative
image shifting, 23, 318-319, image taboos, 24, 292,
297, meanings of, 292, 292-293, 293, 294, 295;
morew or "flaming borders" (spiral designs), 1 7, 22,
22(1.23, 1.25), 23 See also Textile arts,- Woodcarving

Ezo (early Japanese name for Hokkaido and its people,
the Ainu), 60, 68, 74-75, 79-81, 92, 96. See also Ainu
people, Hokkaido

Diet, early Ainu, 7, 36, 203-207, 222, 224
Dietz, Kelly L., 359-365
Dettmer, Hans, linguistic studies, 27, 60

Chiri, Mashiho: Classified Dictionary of the Ainu, 60, 202,- on
shamanism, 264-265, 266-267, linguistic studies, 27,
30, 58, 59, 1 I 1,264,-

Discrimination or prejudice, 9, 16, 24, 73, 225, 233, 274,
341, 369, 372

Chin, Yukie: Ainu Sbinyosbu (Collected Songs of Ainu
Gods), 109

Disease and epidemics, 19,71, 102-107; medicinal
shamanism, 26, 104-105, 102, 104, 105(13.4), 197,
197, 241, 242

Cte (house), 7, 129(16.8), 198(27.2), 227-233,
228, 23 3, directional orientation, 199, 228, modern,
140, 233

Disease spirits (payoka kamuy), 103, 104-107, 196
Doda Anthropological Study, 177

Ezo-shi (Arai), 79, 80, 81, 82. See also Ainu-e

F
Family, 232, 272,- marriage, 296, 359,- maternal traditions,
231, 232, patrilineage, 230, 231-232. See also Gender
roles
Farming, 108. See also Horticulture
Fauna. See Animals
Female principle, 243-244
Festivals, 94-95, 240, 249-250, 284-285, 356
Films, ethnographic, 187-191
Finnish Saami-Ainu exchange program, 184-185
Fire goddess (Fuchi), 199, 228, 229, 241, 243, 248, 270,
329(46.6-7),

Chitei, Hata no, Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku, 79,
79-80

Dog, 275, deity, 252-253,- dog-sending ceremony, 253,
263(37.3),- dogsled travel, 215

Chitose: archaeological sites, 17, 18, 39, 42, geology of,
40

Drift vessels, 116-117

Chokers, 232, 322(45.23), 323(45.25026)

Dubreuil, Chisato O., 9, 12, 287-300, 333, 335-353

Clothing, 21, 3 1 3, 313-326, apron, 323(45.24), 323,
ceremonial, 239, 319(45.1 6), 322(45.22), children's,
288, 320, leggings, 1 53(19.9), sandals and shoes,
218(29.22), 221(29.26), sun visor (Sakhalin),
1 86(24.6), tar (strap), 239, women's ritual belt, 232,
264-265 See also Headgear,- Ornamentation

Duckskin robe, 3 I 6

E

Fishing, 36(2.9), 42-43, 44(3.13-3.14), 200, 201,
210-211,213; government prohibitions against, 36,
37-38

Eagle, 266, 340(47.1 1)

Fish-roe masher, 204

-robes, 3 1 8-3 19, attush (bark cloth), 133,1 52,
289, 3 1 7, birdskin, 3 1 6, cotton, 1 44-1 45, duckskin,
3 I 6, Japanese similarity in, 3 1 8(45.8), retarpe (nettle
fiber), 160-161, 1 72-1 73, 290, sealskin, 320(45.1 7)

Early modern period, 96-101. See a Iso Japanese early
modern state

Fishskin products, I 5 1(19.6a,b), 1 57, 220(29.25), 288,
291,312

Earrings, 325, 325

Fish spirits, 201, 310(44.2). See also Kamuy (spirit deities)

Economy: annual subsistence cycle, 199-200, 235-238,
economic conditions, 98, 359,- market forces, 19. See
also Fishing, Food gathering, Horticulture; Hunting,
Trade

Fitzhugh, William W., 9-28, 60, 116-123, 136

Collections. Sff Museum Ainu collections
Conflict resolution, 245
Constructing Cullures Then and Now conference, 1 16
Crossroads of Continents exhibition,

115, 116

Culin, Stewart, 136(t), 155, 155-162
Cultural exchange, 184-185
Cultural identity, 24-26, 73-73, 95, 109, 287, 372, 380381, preservation of language, 59, 370-373, 373,
presetvation of culture, 183-186, 285, 381, traditional
practices and, 26, 69-70, 226, 309. See also Indigenous
rights movement
Culture, Ainu, 46, 243-44, 260, decline in (real or
perceived), 14, 15-16,24,71-73, 101, 140-141,336,
373,- revitalization of, 25-26, 352-353, 370, 376. See
also Arts, Belief system, Economy, Language, Life
cycle,- Social structure, Traditional practices
Culture hero (oina-kamuy), 261, 265, 275-276, 280
Curious Sights of Ezo Island (Murakami), 20, 6 1, 77(8.6),

84,96, 102(13.1), 106(13.7), 194(26.3), 199,
202(28.3), 207(28.14), 214(29.14), 230-231,
241(33.3), 243, 250(35.5), 251(35.7), 258,
272(38.10), 274, 313, 314(45.4), 326(45.33), 330,
326(45.33), 330. See also Ainu-e

Drum, shaman's (kaco), 262, 264

Ecosystem, 40-41, 198-201, 199(27.1), 208, 219,
compared with Northwest Coast, 117-1 18, 122;
Hokkaido, 1 1, 32—38, iwor (resource zone), 1 99(27.4),
218-219, 227. See also Forest ecology and traditions,Marine habitat and traditions, Natural resources
Ecosystem, The Ainu (Watanabe), 198-201

Edo period, 74, 80, 82, 96-101, 227, 232

Fire pits, archaeological, 165
Fireplace, 199, 228, 229
First-salmon ceremony, 24, 36, 36, 1 18, 119, 200, 219,
221, 253. See also Fishing
Fisheries (Japanese-run), 98-100

Flag, 114
Flora. See Plants
Flower arrows (heper-ay), 249, 25 1 (35.8), 295(42.1 3),
297-298
Food: early Ainu diet, 7, 36, 203-207, 222, 224, food
gathering, 202, 208, 213, 235, 236-237; food
preservation, 202-204, 235, 239; lily root (turep),
203(28.4), 204, 236-237, 238(32.9-10), maple
syrup, 237(32.8). See also Horticulture, Hunting

Education, 369, 371, 371-373

Forest ecology and traditions, 24, 40, broadleaf forests,
35-36. See also Deforestation, Hunting

1899 Protection Act. See Hokkaido Former Aborigines
Protection Act

Fox deity, 21, 353(47.37), fox dance, 284, fox hunting,
210; sending ceremonies for, 252, 259(36.6)

Ekashi (male elder), 183, 244, 340, 380. See also Chieftains

Frois, Louis, 125, 327

Elders: 244, 340(47.12-1 3), ekashi (male elder), 183,
244, 340, 380, fuchi (female elder), 183, 218, 248, 3093 12, 379-381, leading elder (kotan-kor-kur), 232

Fuchi (respected female elder), 183, 218, 248, 309-312,
379-381

Emishi (early term for Ainu), 46, 68, 75-76
107, 296, 325-326 326(45.34),
331, ritual sword (pons emush), 107, 272-273, sword
dance, 285(41.7)

Fuchi (fire goddess), 199, 228, 229, 241,243, 248, 270,

329(46.6-7)

Emush (swords), 97,

Fujimura, Hisakazu: Kamuy, 193-197,- 268-273

Epidemics. See Disease and epidemics

Fujito, Takeki (Ainu artist): Fuchi, 340(47.1 3); Kuma
(Bear), 339(47.9); life-sized figures of elders,
340(47.1 2), Sea Otter, 24, Winter (Hibernation),
339(47.10)

Epi-Jomon. See Jomon culture

Funeral ceremonies, 268-269, 273. See also Burial
customs
Funerary objects, 158-159
Fuzoku (customs/appearances), 97

G
Games, childhood, 246-247, 247
Gender roles, 193, 200, 213, 246-247,- men's work, 234235, 236, 295,- men's work (See also Woodcarving, Boat
building,- Ceremonies, Hunting; Fishing); shamanism
and, 242-243, 262-264, social status and, 107, 244245, women's work (See also Textile arts, Food
gathering; Family), 235-237, 287, 313, 379-381
Gentan, Tani, 75(22.10), 244(33.9), 255(35 1 6), 268269, 282, 283(41.3), 291(42.4), 292
Geographic distribution and migrations, 10-11, 10m,
12(I.7)m, 17(1.7), 19, 47, 67-68. See also Population
Girel, Constant, Beautiful Japan (film), 187-188
Global network of indigenous peoples, 25, 1 14, 359360, 364-365. See also United Nations (UN)
Gods: cave goddess, 274, crow goddess, 28 1, Fuchi (fire
goddess), 199, 228, 229, 241, 243, 248, 270,
329(46.6-7), God Ruling the Upper Heavens, 281,
Kotan-kor-kamuy (creator), 274-275, midwife goddess,
270, possessing god, 194, 270, 271, sun goddess, 276.
See also Kamuy (spirit deities)
Graburn, Nelson H , 301-308
Grain stripping, (28.2-3)
Graves, 49-40, 269, 272, rights to ancestral, 1 15

H

108, 112, 121. See also History, Ainu, and by region
Hokkaido Ainu: ethnic groups, 10-11,29, 119m, 120,
227, 337, 338, 355, 377, ethnological traits, 59, 240,
250, 305, 306, paleolithic cultures, 33(2.7)m, 35-36,
39-44, 40(3.2), 48-49, 150-151, 165, 198,
shamanistic features, 242, 245, 262-264. See also Ainu
people
Hokkaido Ainu Association (Utari Kyokai), 59, 73, 109,
111-114, 369-370

Hokkaido Land Expropriation Committee, 357-358

Iwor (resource zone), 199(27.4), 218-219, 227, 234

Hokkaido Takushokukan collection, 178

Iyomante (bear-sending ceremony), 25-26, 44-45, 184,

Horticulture, 7, 204-205, 21 3-215, garden hoe,
239(32.14)
Houchins, Chang-su, 148-153
House (chise), 7, 198(27.2), 227-233, 228, 233,
directional orientation, 199, 228; modern, 140, 233
House construction, 228, 229, 230-23 1,230
Howell, David L, 96-101
Human figurines (nipopo), 22, 24, 50(4.6, 4.7), 262,
263(37.4-5), 271(38.7-8)
Hunting: 208, 209(29.2), 218(29.23), 218-219, 234,
235, bear, 36(2.8), 200-201, 209-210, 219, bows,
210(29.4), 212(29), deer, 37, I 56(20.4), 200,
209(29.3), 2 10, fox, 210, limitations or prohibitions
on, 221. See also Arrows/Arrowheads

Hattori, Shiro, 27, 59, 62-63, 371-372
Iboshi, Hokuto: Kotan (Village), 109

Headgear, men's: 164, 322(45.22); ceremonial,
295(42.12), 178, 297-298, 323, 325-326

Ice Age, East Asian impacts, 17; glacial period, 32-33,
32(2.1)m, 32(2.2), 17; land bridges, 33-35,
33(2.3)m, 33(2.4)m, 47. See also Archaeological
cultures

Hidaka, 355
Hilger, M. Inez, Together with the Ainu, 27, 92, 356,
photographs of Ainu, 92, 197, 285, 358
Hiller, Hiram M_, 36, 136(t), 1 62(2 1.1), 162-167,
1 63m, 1 68; photographs of Ainu, 92, 163, 164, 165,
197, 228, 285, 358, 369, 381
Hirasawa, Byozan, 84-85, 85, 201,202, 212(29.8),
21 3(29.9), 240, 256(36.1), 257
History of the Ainu, 10-1 1, 27, 45-46, 67-73, 71 m,
74m, 79-85, Koshamain uprising, 46, 68, 78,
Kunashiri-Menashi battle, 19, 96, missionary
workers, 139-140, political changes, 51, 68, 69,
1 12-1 I 3, 232-233,- post-war Occupation, 1 111 12, recent history, 24-26, 72m, 364; Russian
colonial activities, 11, 70, 71-73, 101, 240, 302,•
relocation and expulsion, 11, 108, 112, 121,
Shakushain's War, 19, 69, 70, 97-98, 369. See also
Indigenous rights movement, Japanese early
modern state, Trade
Hitchcock, Romyn: "Ainos of Yezo, Japan," 154,
archaeological expeditions, 18, 136(t), 139,
ethnography of Ainu, 9, 15-16, 64, 327-328,
photographs of Ainu, 9(1.1), 10(1.4), 29, 153, 148,
149, 259(36.5), Smithsonian collection, 148-153, 154
Hokkaido, 9, 27, 71-73, 119m, 143, 1 63m, 218,
archaeological cultures, 3 3(2.7)m, 35-36, 39-46,
40(3.2), 48-49, 150-151, 165, 198, ethnological
collections from, 129(16.7), 149-159, 162-167, 171,
landscape and ecosystem, 11, 36-37, 67, 275,• recent
history, 24-26, 72m, 364; relocation and expulsion,

412

201, 283, 284, archaeological record, 21, 256-260,
defining ethnological trait, 14(1.1 1), 14, 82(9.5), 256,
257, 260, films documenting, 190, government
prohibition against, 69-70, link to Northwest Coast
traditions, 118, 119,-museum performances, 184, 184—
185, ritual features, 240-244, 242, 248-251,
251(35.7), 277

Honshu, 9, 10, 40, 42, 44, 46, 302, Tohoku, 10m, 43, 45,
61

Hayokpe (belief that spirits are disguised), 200, 249

297-298

Iwasaki-Goodman, Masami, 222-226

Homeland (Ainu mosir), 67, 69, 72, 92, 110, 1 14-115,
369, land claims to, 367. See also Hokkaido, Kurile
Islands,- Sakhalin Island

Hunting rites, 219-221

Heros (oina-kamuy), 261, 265, 275-276, 280

Ishida, Hajime, 52-56
Itaomachip (boat), 186(24.7), 374, 375, 376

Ivory bone carvings, 1 70(22.3), 293(42.9)

Hashimoto, Ryutaro, Prime Minister, 368

Hearth, 199, 228, 229

Iron tool artifacts, 49

Iumkte (sending spirits of inanimate objects), 254-255

Hata no Chitei, Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku, 79,
79-80

Heper-ay (flower arrows), 249, 25 1 (35.8), 295(42.1 3),

International Labor Organization (ILO) Convention on
Indigenous Peoples, 360, 367

Hokkaido Former Aborigines Protection Act, 25-26, 72,
363, 369, movement against, 108, 108-110, 366

Harpoons, 44(3.12-14), 123, 2 I 1,2 1 4(29.1 2-1 3), 222

Hanihara, Kazuro, 53, 55

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR), 360, 361, 367

Hokkaido Ainu Cultural Research Center, 372

-marine, harpoons used, 44(3.12-14), 123, 211,
21 4(29.12-1 3), 222; of sea mammals, 1 1 (1.5),
44(3.12), 51(4.10), 21 I, 214(29.14), whaling, 222,
224-225

Hakodate, 155, 1 63m 179-180

International Bill of Human Rights, 360

Identity, cultural, 25-26, 73-73, 95, 109, 287, 372, 380381, preservation of language, 59, 370-373, 373;
preservation of culture, 183-186, 285, 381, traditional
practices and, 26, 69-70, 226, 309. See also Indigenous
rights movement
Ikupasuy (prayer stick), 21, 42, 125, 150, 180, 224, 234-

235, 296, 3 10(44.2), images and themes on, 14, 105,
143, 149, 159, 170(22.5), 171 195, 252,
294(42.10), 334 196, 333(46.16); lacquered,
332(46.1 4), mistaken for mustache lifter, 12, 14, 327328, parts of, 33 1, 331-334, ritual uses of, 327, 327330, 328(46.5); types of, 330-331
Illustrated Gazetteer of Ezo (Arai), 79, 80, 81, 82. See also
Ainu-e
Illustrations of Ezo Livelihood (Murakami), 84, 207(29.1 5),

375, 376. See also Ainu-e
Illustrations of Northern Ezo (Mamiya), 106( 1 3.6),

212(29.7), 215(29.15), 218(29.23), 235, 269(38.2)
Image taboos, 24, 292, 297
Inaw (sacred shaved stick): 21, 60, 78,

193, 199,299,
231(31.7), 244(33.9), 294(42.1 l); carvings, 296297

Indians, North American, 15, 16, 1 16-123, 279
Indigenous rights movement: activism, 67, 72-73, I 12115, 113, 114, 369-370, 370, 377, against Hokkaido
Protection Act, 108, 108-110, 366, against Nibutani
dam, 355-358, 367-368, for Ainu Shinpo Act, 1 15,
361, 366-368, 370, early leftist activism, 112-115,
international arena, 25, I 14, 359-360, 364-365;
Japanese-Ainu relations and, 361-364, 366-368
Inheritance, 232
Institute of Japanese Studies, 128

J

James, Arthur Curtiss, 168-174
Japanese Ainu museum collections, 128, 175-182
Japanese-Ainu relations, 19, 61,71-73, 75-78, 96-101,
240, the "Ainu problem," 112-114, assimilationist
policies, 10, 14, 70-73,74, 108, 140-141, 149, 184,
203, indigenous rights issues (current), 361-364, 366368, Kunashiri-Menashi battle, 19, Shakushain's War,
19, 69, 70, 97-98, 369. See also Japanese early modern
state, Japanese laws and court decisions,- Trade
Japanese early modern state, 74—78, 96-101, Koshamain
uprising, 46, 68, 78, Matsumae clan, 9, 69, 88, 91,9798, Meiji restoration, 9, 14, 26, 117, 233, 369,
Tokugawa Shogunate, 13, 19,71,78,88-89, 96, 101,
336, 374, Wajin-Ainu conflict, 68-71, 282-283
Japanese laws and court decisions: Ainu Shinpo Act of
1997, 10, 25-26, 59, 73, 300, 373,- Hokkaido Former
Aborigines Protection Act, 25-26, 363, 369, Land
Regulation Ordinance (1872), 72; New Law for the
Ainu People (proposed), 115, Nibutani Decision, 25,
115, 357-358, 362-363,367-368
Japanese Committee for the International Biological
Program, 55
Japanese influences, 60, 76-78, 121-122, in basketry,
306,- language elements, 62-63, religious, 262-263,similarity in robes, 3 1 8(45.8), woodcarving and, 331 —
332. See also Trade goods
Japanese paintings of the Ainu. See Ainu-e
Jesup, Morris K., North Pacific Expedition, 63, 116, 138,
169, 170
Joest, Wilhem, 129
Jomon-Ainu relation, 30-31, 35-36, 53-56
Jomon culture, 17, 18, 33, 40-42, 44, 46, 123, 222, 303

K
Kaizawa, Koichi, 355-358
Kaizawa, Tadashi, 355, 357-358, 377
Kaizawa, Toroshino, 356, 362
Kakizaki, Hakyo: Ainu-e artist, 9, I 8, 83-84: Portraits of
Ezo Chieftains, 8, 18,28,37,66,83, 122, 124, 192,
286, 354
Kamchatka, 10m, 10, 58, 62, 303, 308
Kamuy-puyar (god window), 199,229
Kamuyrini (religious object), 226
Kamuy (spirit deities), 24,

169, 198, 256, 273, belief that
they are disguised (hayokpe), 200, 249, dead spirits, 193—
194, 196-197, disease spirits (payoka kamuy), 103-107, 196,
evil spirits, 194, 252,270, 271,275,276, 348(47.27);
human-spirit relationship, 22, 270, 194-197,- image taboos
related to, 24, 292, 297, inanimate objects as, 254-255,
living spirits, 193, 194, 197; word spirits, 196

-animal spirits, 24, 39, 200, 202, 276-277,- bear
deity (kimun-kamuy), 21, 36, 43(3.1 1), 93, 187, 199,
201, 224, 248-250,- fox, 353(47.37); owl, 21,252

-gods: cave goddess, 274,- crow goddess, 281, Fuchi
(fire goddess), 199, 228, 229, 241, 243, 248, 270,
329(46.6-7), God Ruling the Upper Heavens, 281, ,
Kotan-kor-kamuy (creator), 274-275, midwife goddess,
270, possessing god, 194, 270, 271; sun goddess, 276
Kamuy-nomi (prayer), 21,201,248, 328—329, 329, 346,

implements used with, 193, 199,231(31.7),
244(3 3.9), 294, 294(42.1 I), 296. See also Ikupasuy, haw
Kamuy-yukar (tales of the gods), 274, 276-277, 281, 283

Kano, Oki, 363
Karafuto, 1, 70, 111, dialect, 59, 60
Katz, Adria H , 162-167
Kawamura, Noriko: 349-351, 350(47.32), Hokkaido no
shiki (Four seasons in Hokkaido), 350—351(47.30), 350—
351, Ryo (Force or spirit), 349, 350, Spirit of the Ainu, back
cover
Kawamura, Kaneto, 110, 190, 319, 349-350
Kawamura, Saburo, I I 1
Kayano, Shigeru, 7, 25, 27, 30, 60, 105, 300, 334, 377,■
Ainu no mincfo (Ainu folk crafts), 60, 303,- filmmaking,
191, opposition to Saru dam, 37-38, 1 15,- Our Land
Was a Forest, 27
Keira, Mit'sunori and Tomoko, 234-239

Land Regulation Ordinance (1872), 72
Language, 57m, 57-60, 63, 120, origins of, 17, 30, 5859, 61-65; place names, 60-62 135, 222, preservation
of, 59, 370-373, 373; studies and compilations of, 5960, 62, 371-372

Munro, Neil G , 104, 105, 147, 180, 180-181, 266,
328(46.4), Ainu Creed and Cult, 328, ethnographic films,
190

Laws and court decisions: Ainu Shinpo 1997, 10, 25-26,
59, 73, 300, 373; Hokkaido Former Aborigines
Protection Act (1899), 25-26, 363, 369, Land
Regulation Ordinance (1872), 72, New Law for the
Ainu People (proposed), 115, Nibutani Decision, 25,
1 15, 357-358, 362-363, 367-368

Murakami, Shimanojo, Ainu-e artist, 84, 303-304,- Curious
Sights of Ezo Island (ethnographic illustrations), 20, 61,
84, 77(8.6), 96, 98, 102(13.1), 106(13.7),
1 94(26.3), I 99, 202(28.3), 207(28.1 4),
214(29.14), 230-231,241(33.3), 243, 250(35.5),
251(35.7), 258, 272(38.10), 274, 313, 314(45.4),
326(45.33), 330, 326(45.33), 330,- Illustrations of Ezo
Livelihood, 84, 207(29.1 5), 375, 376

Leadership, 232, 245

Muraki, Miyuki, 246-247

Lee, Molly, 301-308

Murakami, Teisuki, 84

Life cycle: birth, 267-270, childhood, 246-247, 271,
288, cycle of subsistence activities, 199-200, 235—
238, marriage, 296, 359; yearly cycle of subsistence,
199-200, 235-238. See also Death, Elders,- Gender roles

Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology (MAE), 128,
132(t), 132-135, 1 33

Life of the Shiraoi Ainu (film), 189

Lineage (family), 272-273, maternal traditions, 231,
232, patrilineage, 230, 231-232
Linguistic origins, 17, 30, 58-59, 61-65
Lip tattoos, 14,91(10.6), 148, 154,325, 380. See also
Tattoos, womens

Keira, Tomoko, 379-381
Kendall, Laurel, 168-175

Museum Ainu collections, 13, 16, 27,- Ainu Museum in
Shiraoi, 26, 94, 183, 183-186, 223, 233; inventory
projects, 146-147,- Nibutani Ainu Culture Museum,
377-378
-European, 127, 127-131, 128(t), 129(t), 129,
1 3 I m, Museum of Anthropology and Ethnology
(MAE), 128, 132(t), 132-135, 133
-Japanese, 128, 176-177, 181-182, Baba Collection,
179-180, Hokkaido Takushokukan Collection, 178,
Kodama Collection, 179-180, 185, Kono Family
Collection, 178-179,-Tokugawa Collection, 177-178

Kikuchi, Isao, 74-78

M

Kikuchi, Toshihiko, 47-51

Makiri (knife): carved, 21

-North American, 136(t), 136-139, 137(t), 140,
146-147, American Museum of Natural History, 168—
174, Brooklyn Museum of Art, 155-161,- Smithsonian
Institution, 136, 148-153, 154, University of
Pennsylvania, 162-167, 167

Mamiya, Rinzo: Ainu-e artist, 304, Illustrations of Northern
Ezo, 106(13.6), 212(29.7), 215(29.15), 218(29.23),
235, 269(38.2)

Music, 363; musical instruments—mukkuri, 247, 283,
shaman's drum (kaco), 262, 264, tonkori, 284. See also
Performance arts, Songs

Maps: archaeological, 33(2.7)m, 48-49m, environmen¬
tal 38m, explorations, 163m, geographic distribution
and migrations, 10m, 12(1.7)m, 119m; historical,
71m, 74m, Hokkaido region, 3 3(2.7)m, 72m,
linguistic, 57m, maritime trade, 86m, museum
collections, 131m

Myth(s): Ainurakkur myth, 275-276,- of creation, 274275; mythical lands, 279, on origins of shamanism,
265-267,- Samaikur myth, 261, 265-266,- tree of life in,
266, trickster in, 279. See also Yukar (epic stories)

Killer whale (orca), 4 1,225(30.5), 226, symbols of,
332(46.12-1 3)
Kimbai, Kasukabe, 200, 200
Ki-men (wooden masks), 25, 34 I (47.1 5a, b), 343

Kindaichi, Kyosuke, linguistic studies, 21, 27, 30, 59, 60,
65, 264
Kita-ichi, Tetsuo, AinuMosir, Kamuy Mosir, 227
Knife (makiri): carved, 21, 167, 215, 216(29.19),
231(31.8), 235, 236, 293(42.8),-carving tool, 295296,- whalebone, 223(30.3)
Kodama collection, 179-180, 185

1 67, 215, 2 I 6(29.1 9),
231(31.8), 235, 236, 293(42.8); earning tool, 295296; whalebone, 223(30.3)

Kodama, Mari, 27, 313-326

Maraini, Fosco, 147, 327-334, photographs of Ainu, I 5,
327, 328, 329

Kodama, Sakuzaemon, 27, 80, 147, 180, 185, 270, 320

Marimo festival, 94

Kodama, Teiryo: Ainu-e artist, 82-83, 87, Ezo Customs and
Manners, Scenes from Ezo Island, 14(1.1 I), 67(7.1),
3 1 8(45.45)

Marine habitat and traditions, II, II, 24, 5 1(4.10), 121,
123, 134(17.2), 199(27.3); boat building, 235, 374375, 376,- boat (itaomachip), 1 86(24.7), 374, 375, 376,
carved paddle, 1 7; chip-sanke (boat-launching
ceremony, 356, 357, 362, stranded-whale dance, 223,
223(30.2), 226. See also Fishing

Kohara, Toshihiro , 202-207
Kono, Motomichi, 1 16-123
Kono family collection, 178-179,181, 182
Koshamain uprising, 46, 68, 78
Kotan-kor-kamuy (creator), 274-275

Kotani, Yoshinobu, 11, 136-147, 181
Kotan (village): 198(27.1),

198,216-217, 227,
228(3 1.2), directional orientation, 199,■ iwor
(surrounding territory), I 99(27.4), 2 18, 227, 234 ,
storehouses, 207(28.1 4)

Marine mammals: sea otter, 24, 46, whales, 4 1, 222-223,
225(30.5), 226, 332(46.12-13)
Marine-mammal products, 23, 215(29.16), 320(29.24),
320(45.17)
Maritime hunting, 10, 1 1(1.6), 43, 44(3.1 2), 5 1 (4.10),
211,21 4(29.1 4), harpoons used in, 44(3.1 2-1 4),
123, 21 1,214(29.12-1 3), whaling, 222, 224-225

N
Nagata, Hosei, 60, 282
Nakagawa, Hiroshi, 371-373
Naming/names, 270-271
Nationalism, 67, Ainu, I 1 4,1 14-1 15
National Museum of Natural History (Smithsonian) Ainu
collection, 136, 148, 154, 188. See also Hitchcock,
Romyn
Natori, Takemitsu, 27, 224-225
Natural history of Ainu homelands, 32-38
Natural resources: deforestation, 37, 38m, 356,exploitation of, 9-10, 36-37, 39, logging, 356, mining,
369,- water pollution, 356-358
Natsui, Umetaro, 338

Kozintsev, Alexander G., 31

Maritime trade, 86m, 86-91, 120, 336, Santan trade, 46,
81,86,241. See also Japanese-Ainu relations, Trade

Krashemnnikov, Stepan, 29, 308

Marriage, 296, 359

Kreiner, Josef, 27, 125-131, 136

Masks, 25, 42, 122

Krupnik, Igor, 261-265, 309

Maternal traditions, 231,232

Needlecases, 23, 46, 47, 159, 222, 299, 300,
321(45.21)

Kuma (bear): care of cubs, 248-249, 250, 250, carvings

Matsuda, Denjuro, 88

Nemuro, 146, 163m, 222

Matsui, Umetaro, 337(47.6), 338

Nibutani, 181, Ainu Culture Museum, 377-378, 378,
decision on Nibutani dam, 25, 1 15, 357-358, 362363, 367-368

of, 93-94, 273(38.1 4), 337, 337-339, 339(47.9),
deities, 21, 36, 43(3.1 1), 93, 187, 199, 201, 224, 248250, hunting, 36(2.8), 200, 201,209-210, 219. See also
lyomante

Kunashiri-Menashi battle, 19, 96
Kurile Ainu: 10, 1 1, I 15, 120, 133-135, 134, 179(23.5),
21 1, 213, 217, 303, 306, 308

Matsumae clan, 9, 69, 88, 89, 91,97-98
Meiji restoration, 9-10, 14, 26, 117, 233, 369. See also
Japanese early modern state
Microlithic culture sites, 40, 48
Mining, 369

Kurile Islands: archaeological cultures, 43-44, ethnologi¬
cal expeditions and traits, 133-1 34, 1 36(t), 156-159,
history, 10, 59,- pithouses, 10, 44, 228, 256, 259

Modern arts, 227, 339, 352-353, including taboo
images, 24. See also Fujito, Takeki, Kawamura, Noriko,
Sunazawa, Bikky

Kushiro, 158

Mogami, Tokunai, 29, 88, 128,1 30( 16.9), 282
Montandon, George, 30, 304-308

L

Morew (spiral designs or "flaming borders"), I 7, 22, 22

(1.25), 23

Lacquerware, 99, 100, 141, ceremonial cups (tuki), 21, 77,
1 78, I 82, 328(46.3, 46.5), 329-330,- comb, 50, 50

Mori, 1 63m, 165

Land bridges, paleolithic, 33-35, 33(2.3)m, 33(2.4)m, 47

"Mustache lifter," ikupasuy mistaken for, 12, 14, 327-328

Land reform, I 11-1 12

Morse, Edward S , 18, 126, 136(t), 139, 185
See also Ikupasuy

Necklaces (tamasay), 323-324, beaded necklaces, 21,22,
139, 158, 1 79, 324(45.27-28), chokers, 232,
322(45.23), 323(45.25-26)

Niewan, 1 63m, 165
Nipopo (human figurines), 22, 24, 50(4.6, 4.7), 262,

263(37.4-5), 271(38.7-8)
Nishikawa, Hokuyo, Ainu Manners and Customs, 156(20.4),
207(28.13), 210, 237(32.8), 238(32.9-10),
250(35.4)
Nomadism, 7, 20, 217, 240
Nomoto, Masahiro, 9(1.2), 222-226, 227-233, 365, 379
Nomura, Ciichi, 359, 362
North American Ainu collections, 136(t), 136-139,
1 37(t), 140, 146-147, American Museum of Natural
History, 175, Brooklyn Museum of Art, 155-161,
Smithsonian Institution, 136, 148-153, 154,
University of Pennsylvania, 162-167, 167
North American Ainu Documentation Project, 136

413

North American Indians, 15-16, 24, 116-123, 279, 245
Northwest Asian cultures, Ainu ties to, 47-51
Northwest Coast peoples: archaeological cultures of
North Pacific rim, 12m, 52-56; ethnological
comparisons with Ainu, 24, 47-51,49, 116-123,
ecosystem compared with Ainu, 117-118, 122, parallel
traditions, 62, 1 16, 1 18-1 19, 123, 301, 307-308. See
also Eskimos,- Siberian cultures
Nusa (altar), 164,

165, 199, 230, 256-260, 264

o
Ocean habitat. See Marine habitat and traditions

47, 51, 89, 104, 105, 135, 194, 242, 246,
254(35.13), 255, 259(36.6), 261, 315, on
shamanism, 104, 265-266,- sound recordings, 59, 136
Pipe (kiseri), 245, 298, curved, 174-175(22.8). See also
Smoking kits and implements
Piraton, 143, 155, 163m, 377
Pithouses, archaeological, 10, 44, 228, 259
Place names, 60-61,62 135,222
Plants, 235, lily root {turep), 203(28.4), 204, 238(32.910); vegetation history, 35, 35m, 202-204
Plant spirits, 200, 202. See also Kamuy (spirit deities)
Play, childrens', 246-247

Ogihara, Shinko, 132-135, 274-277

Population decline of, 106-107, early Ainu, 11,
historical migration model, I 7(1.1 7); modern Ainu, 9,
26. See also Geographic distribution and migrations

Oginaka, Mie, 278-281

Portraits of Ezo Chieftains (Kakizaki), 8, 18, 28, 28, 37, 66,

Olschleger, Hans Dieter, 27, 208-221

Ohnuki-Tierney, Emiko.l 18, 240-245
Ohtsuka, Kazuyoshi, 92-95, 374-376
Ohyo (bark-fiber thread), 16, 1 51 (1 9.7), 235-236, 3 1 4,

314-316, 315
Oina-kamuy (culture hero), 261,265, 275-276, 280, tales

of (oina), 274
Okada, Kazuo, 187-191
Okhotsk culture, 18, 23, 43-44, 50-51, 222. Sec also
Siberian cultures
Omori shell mound, 126
Onkami (worship), 21

Ono, Yugo, 32—38, photographs by, 36, 38(2.12)
14, 25-26,
44, 202, 248, 251-254, 257; dances accompanying,
257, deer sending, 253-254,- dog sending, 253,- fox
sending, 252, 259(36.6), owl sending, 252, 255,
whale sending, 224-225. See also Iyomante, Iwakte

83, 122, 124, 192, 286, 354
Poster, Amy, 155-161
Prayer {kamuy-nomi), 21,201, 248, 328-329, 329, 346,
implements used with, 193, 199,231(31.7),
244(3 3.9), 294, 294(42.1 1), 296. See also Ikupasuy, Inaw
Prayer stick. See Ikupasuy

Sakhalin Ainu, 10(1.4), 11(1.5), 112, 1 94, ethnological
traits, I 1(1.6), 24, 30, 135, 135, 172-173, 179(23.6),
I 86(24.6), 209, 211,213, 216, 221, 240-245, 278,
283, 319-320,- prayer sticks, 330-331,- shamanistic
features, 242, 262, 266, trade actvities, 86-87, 88
Sakhalin Island, 51,69, 70, 374, archaeological cultures,
40(3.2), 46, 47, 49 (See also Okhotsk culture),- artifact
collection expeditions in, 27, 30, 125, 133, 135, 170171, 266, history, 10 m, 10-11, I 1 (1.5), 24, 87-91,
120-121, 108, 1 1 2, 205,- trade, 86-89. See also
Karafuto
Salmon, 201, 203(28.4),- first-salmon ceremony, 24, 36,
36, I 18-1 19, 200, 219, 221, 253,- salmon run, 199-200
Salmon fishing: 36(2.9), 44(3.13-3.14), 200, 201,
210-211, 213
Salmon-skin products, 1 51(1 9.6a,b), 157,220(29.25),
288, 291, 312
Samaikur myth, 261,265-266
Sapporo, 1 63m, 170, 355-357, district court decision,
25, 357-358, 362-363, 367-368

Prehistoric period. See Archaeological artifacts,Archaeological cultures

Saranip (twined baskets), 16, 301,302, 303-305,

Prejudice or discrimination, 9, 16, 24, 73, 225, 233, 274,
341, 369, 372

Saru River, and region, 136(t), 155, 355-358

"Proto-Ainu" culture, 260

Sasaki, Toshikazu, 27, 79-85

Proto-Australoid theory, 31

Sasamura, Jiro, 369-370

Putnam, Frederick W., 168-174

Satsumon culture, 7, 18, 44-45, 205

Opunire (spirit-sending ceremonies), 14(1.1 1),

Oral traditions, 19, 183, 271, 274-277,- animals in epic
stories (yukar), 276-277,- studies and collections of, 27,
59, yukar (epic stories), 2 1, 24, 248, 278, 278-281,
280

Sake drinking, 21, 135, 77, 178, 182, 264, 297, 328,ceremonial lacquerware cups (tuki), 21, 77, 178, 182,
328(46.3, 46.5), 329-330,- making sake, 283

305(43.8), 307-308, 310-311, 31 1

Sasaki, Shiro, 86-91

Schools, 369, 371, 371-373
Sealskin robe, 320(45.1 7)
Sea otter, 24, 46. See also Marine mammals
Qing Dynasty, 86-88. See also Maritime trade

Seaweed, 202

"Queer People, A," 15, 153

Seisuiji En'gi, 80, 81

Quivers, 164-165, 21 7(29.20), 235(32.2), 273(38.1 3)

Orca whale, 41,225(30.5), 226, symbols of,
332(46.12-13)

R

Origin theories. See Ainu origins—theories

Racial origins. See Ainu origins—theories

Sending ceremonies: 14(1.1 1), 14, 25-26, 44, 202, 248,
dances accompanying, 257,- deer sending, 253-254,
dog sending, 253, fox sending, 252, 259(36.6), iwakte,
254-255, 257,- opunire, 251-254, 257, owl sending, 252,
255, whale sending, 224-225. See also Iyomante (bear¬
sending ceremony)

Orita, Suteno, 379, 379

Raitokoro Kawaguchi site, 257-258

Settlement. See Village (kotan)

Ornamentation: amulets, 270,270(38.6), 310(44.3),
beaded necklaces, 21, 22, 139, 158, 179, 323-324,
324(45.27-28), chokers, 232, 322(45.23),
323(45.25, 45.26),- earrings, 325, 325, womens
tattoos, 292, 294, 325, 326(45.32-33). See also
Ceremonial clothing,- Ceremonial headdress

Refsing, Kirsten, 27, 61, 371

Sewing kits, 123. See also Needlecases

Reincarnation, 193, 197, 268, 270, 273

Sewing thread, 31 3, of bark-fiber thread (ohyo),
1 51(19.7), 235-236, 314, 314-316, 3 I 5, thread
twisting, 238, 238(32.1 8)

Oshamanbe, 163m, 213
Owl, 38, 42,- deity, 21, 252, sending ceremony, 252, 255
Oyabe, Jenichiro, 1 36(t), 142, 162(21.2), 162-167, 163m

Religion: altar (nusa), 164, 165, 199, 230, 256-260,264,
belief system, 228, 235, 328, 380-381, burial customs,
106, 158-159, 268-269, 272, onkami (worship), 21;
transmigration of spirits, 193, 197, 268,270, 273. See
also Ceremonies,- Shamanism, Kamuy (spirit deities);
Kamuy nomi, Ikupasuy, Inaw

Religious objects: kamuyrini, 226, nipopo (human
figurines), 22, 24, 50(4.6, 4.7), 262, 263(37.4-5),
271 (38.7-8),- women's ritual belt, 232, 264-265. See
also Nusa (altar), Ikupasuy (prayer stick),- Inaw (sacred
shaved stick)

Shakai-ketai (social structure), 227, 244-245, family,

232, 272, maternal traditions, 231,232, patrilineage,
230, 231-232; social status, 244-245. See also Elders;
Gender roles
Shakushain's War, 19, 69, 70, 97-98, 369

Paleo-Asian flora and fauna, 34-35, 34(2.5)m, 34(2.6)m,
35(2.7)

Relocation of Ainu, 11, 108, 112, 121
Resource zone (iwor), 199(27.4), 218-219, 227, 234

Shamanism, 243-244, 266, initiation (bubyou), 266-267,
medicinal, 26, 102, 104-105, 102, 104, 105(13.4),
196-197, 1 97, 241-242, seance, 26 1, 262, shaman's
drum (kaco), 262, 264, shamans consulted in war, 243;
Siberian parallels, 261,262, 265, 267. See also Religious
objects

Paleolithic and prehistoric period. See Archaeological
cultures

Retarpe (nettle-fiber) garments, 160-161, 172-173,290

Shaved stick. See Inaw

Rice cakes, 239(32.1 1-12)

Shell lamp, 228(3 1.4)

Ritual. See Opunire, Iyomante, Religion, Shamanism

Shell-mound excavations, 52, 18, 126

Rivers and waterways, 36, 1 99, 200 227, words for, 60,
62. See also Amur river,- Saru river

Shinto ritual, 21

P

Paleolithic land bridges, 33-35, 33(2.3)m, 33(2.4)m, 47
Patrilineage, 230, 231-232
Payoka kamuy (disease spirits), 103-107, 196

Performance arts: songs, 127,- throat singing, 285,- whale
songs, 223, 226; yukar (epic stories), 21, 24, 248, 278,
278-281,280. See also Dancing, Music
Perry, Matthew, 14, 29
Peter the Great Museum Ainu collection, 128, 132(t),
132-135, 1 33
Philippi, Donald L., Songs of Gods, Songs of Humans, 77
Phographs of Ainu, 60, 9 1 (l0.6), 95, 101, 140, 168,
200, 208, 239(32.1 I), 248, 251(35.6), 263(37.3),
267, 270, 271, 280, 312(44.7), 357, 368, 371,
373, 377, 379. See also by ethnographer (Pilsudski,
Bronislaw,- Hilger, M. Inez, Hiller, Hiram M., and
others)
Pictorial Biography of Prince Shotoku (Chitei), 79, 79-80

Pilsudski, Bronislaw: ethnological work with Sakhalin
Ainu, 27, 30, 135, 254, 265,- photographs of Ainu, 30,

414

River pollution, 356-358
Robes, 3 1 8-3 1 9,- attush (bark cloth), 133, 152,289,
3 I 7, birdskin, 3 1 6; cotton, 1 44-145, duckskin, 3 I 6,
Japanese similarity in, 3 1 8(45.8),- retarpe (nettle fiber),
160-161, 172-173, 290, sealskin, 320(45.17)

Shiraoi, 99, 143, 163m, 164, 168, 168, 188,227; Ainu
Museum in, 26, 94, 183, 183—186, 223, 233
Shternberg, Leo, 30, 63, 265
Siberian cultures: ethnological comparisons with Ainu,
1 1, 47-51, 48m, 51(4.8); parallel shamanistic
traditions, 261, 262, 265, 267, parelleis in basketry,
307, 308

Russia: colonial activities, 1 I, 70, 71-73, 92, 101,240,
302, ethnography, 30, 59, trade with Ainu, 10, 86-91

Siddle, Richard, 67-73, 108-115

Ryukyuan culture, 31, 56

Siebold, Heinrich von, 126(16.4), 127; shell-mound

s

Siebold, Philipp Franz von, 14, 18, 126, 126

Sacred shaved stick. See Inaw

Skulls: archaeological deposits, 52, 257-260, 264, bear,
253, 256, owl, 255

excavations, 18, 126

Sacrifice, 241-242, 249, 253, 263(37.3)
St. Petersburg collection, Museum of Anthropology and
Ethnology (MAE), 128, 132(t), 132-135, 133

Silver artifacts, 50

Smallpox, 102-103, 105(13.4)
Smithsonian, 136, 148-153, 1 54, 188

Smoking kits and implements, 19, 298, 334,■ curved pipe,
! 74-1 75(22.8); pipe holder, 181,298,- pipe (kiseri),
245, 298, smoking kits, 138, 175(22.9), 286, 297,
334; tobacco box, 19, 181, 298,■ tobacco pouch,
174(22.17), 244(33.8)
Snowshoes, 156(20.3), 157
Social factors: alcoholism, 73; discrimination or
prejudice, 9, 16, 24, 73, 225, 233, 274, 341, 369, 372,economic conditions, 98, 359, education, 369, 371,
371-373,- infant mortality, 270
Social structure (shakai-ketai), 227, 244-245, family, 232,
272, maternal traditions, 231,232, patrilineage, 230,
231-232, social status, 244-245. See also Eiders,- Gender
roles
Songs, 127, throat singing, 285; whale songs, 223, 226
See also Music
Spear (marek), 211, 235
Spiral designs (morew), 17, 22, 22(1.23, 1.25), 23
Spirit deities. See Kamuy
Spirit-sending ceremonies (opunire), 14(1.11), 14, 2526, 44, 202, 248, 25 1-254, 257,- dances accompany¬
ing, 257, deer sending, 253-254,- dog sending, 253,fox sending, 252, 259(36.6),- owl sending, 252,
255, whale sending, 224-225. See also Iwakte:
Iyomante

lip tattoos, 14, 91(10.6), 148, 154, 380
Technologies. See Arts, Fishing, House (chise), Hunting
Teufel (coiled baskets), 23, 134(17.3), 304, 305,
305(43.7), 308
Terashima, Ryoan, Wakan Sansai zue, 8 1, 81-82
Territorial disputes, Ainu relocation, I I, 108, 112, 121
Territory around village (iwor), 1 99(27.4), 218-2 19,
227, 234
Textile arts, 159, 190-191, 215, 237, 287-292, design
techniques, 1 77(23.2),- embroidery, 144-145,239,
287, 293, 317-318, 320,- learning skills and designs,
246-247, 247(34.6), 291-292, 309-312, 312,
320(45.1 8), 379, 379-381, loom, 215-216,
3 1 2(44.7), making bark-fiber thread (ohyo),
1 51(19.7), 235-236, 3 14, 314-316, 3 1 5,-mat
making, 237, thread twisting, 238, 238(32.1 8). See
also Baskets,- Clothing,- Design elements, Ornamen¬
tation
-fabrics: animal hides, 313; attush (bark cloth), 16,
133, 152, 289, 317, 323(45.23); birdskin, 313, 316,
cotton, 1 44-1 45; fishskin products, 151(1 9.6a,b),
157, 220(29.25), 288, 291, 312, imported cotton,
316-319; nettle plant (retarpe), 160-161, 172-173,
290

u
Uimam (audience), 67, 82, 98, 98, 99-100

United Nations (UN), 25, 1 14, 359, 359, 362, 370,
Working Group on Indigenous Populations, 115, 360,
363, 372, World Health Organization, 365,- World
Women's Conference (Beijing), 380
University of Pennsylvania Ainu collection, 162-167, 167
Ushiro, Hiroshi, 39-46
Utagawa, Hiroshi, 21, 39, 256-260
Utari Kyokai, 59, 111-112, 113, 114

V
Vegetation history, 35, 35m, 202-204. See also Plants
Village (kotan): 198(27.1), 198,216-217,227,
228(31.2), 234, directional orientation, 199, iwor
(resource area), 199(27.4), 218, 227, 234 ,
storehouses, 207(28.1 4)
Volcano Bay, 125, 136(t), 140, 163m, 164, 165

w

Thread, 31 3; bark-fiber thread (ohyo), i 5 1(19.7), 235—
236, 314, 314-316, 3 1 5

Wada, Kan, 261-267

Thread twisting, 238, 238(32.1 8)

Wajin-Ainu conflict, 68-71, 282-283

Tobacco box, 181 298. See also Smoking kits and
implements

Walker, Brett L., 102-107

Stick, sacred shaved. See Inaw

Tobacco pouch, 174(22.7), 244(33.8). See also Smoking
kits and implements

Watarito people, 77-78

Stone age. See Archaeological cultures, Paleolithic land
bridges

Together with the Ainu (Hilger), 27, 356

Starr, Frederick: "Ainu Notes,” 146,- escorting Ainu to St.
Louis Exposition, 140-142, 155, 159, 309, ethnologi¬
cal work with Ainu, 16, 136(t), 140, 141, collections,
142-146, 155-156, 159, 166,-photographs of Ainu,
16, 140(18.3)

Stone tools, 48, 51
Stone vessels, 166
Straits. See Land bridges

Tohoku, 10m, 43, 45, 61
Tokoro, 257-258

Tokugawa Shogunate, 9, 13, 19,71,78,88-89,96, 101,
336, 374. See also Japanese early modern state

Sunazawa, Chinita, 351-352,- A Daughter's Happiness,
351(47.31), 351,- Yang, 353(47.35),- Yin, 352(47.34)

Tomakomai region geology, 40

Sunazawa, Ichitaro, 110, 110-111
Sunazawa, Kazuo, 111: Portrait of Ichitaro Sunazawa, 1 1 1
Sunazawa, Peramonkoro, 1 10, 110, 349, 380(55.3), 381
Suwa, Tadaka, Suwa Daimyojin ekotoba, 80-81
Swords (emush), 97, 107, 296, 325-326 326(45.34),
331, ritual sword (pons emush), 107, 272-273,- sword
dance, 285(41.7)

T

Tombs. See Graves
Torao, Haru, 379, 380(55.4)
Torii, Ryuzo, 27, 80
Totem poles, 1 16, 122, 342(47.17), 344(47.20),
tourism and, 3 38
Tourism, 73, 95, 101, and ethnic identity, 95, tourist
areas, 25, 94
Tourist art, 335, 335-337, 336, 337, 338, 342-343

Window, sacred (kamuy-puyar), 199, 229
Woodcarving, 21,22-23, 94(1 1.4), 167, 235-237, 295,bowls, 1 50, 205, 206, 299(42.1 8), box, 1 79,
237(32.8), cuived pipe, 1 74-1 75(22.8), Japanese
influence, 331-332,- mortar and pestle, 171,239(32.1 112), paddle, 1 7, plates and platters, 13, 153(19.1), 206,
298(42.16), 299(42.20); tobacco box, 19, utensils, 205,
206, 298(42.1 7), 298-299. See also Design elements,
Modern arts, Ikupasuy (prayer stick),- Inaw (sacred shaved
stick), Makiri (knife); Tourist art
Word spirits, 196
Work. See Gender roles
World War II, 110, 134

Toys, 246, 246-247
Trade: early Ainu, 10, 66-67, 68-71, 232, 240, 302, 374;
fur trade, 23, 86-87, maritime, 86m, 86-91, 120, 336,
restrictions on, 97,- Sakhalin Island and, 86-87, 88;
Santan trade, 46, 81, 86, 241
Trade goods, 20, 60, 78, 87, 98, 241, incorporated into
crafts ("making them Ainu"), 7, 19, 19, 90, 91,
322(45.23), swords, 97, 107. See also Lacquerware
Traditional practices, 197-198, Ainu identity and, 26,
69-70,- commercialized, 24-25, limitations or
prohibitions on, 221, 225-226. Sec also Arts,
Ceremonies

Taboos or prohibitions: blood taboos, 244, image taboos,
24, 292, 297,- taboo words, 58

Transmigration of spirits, 193, 197, 268, 270, 273

Takakura, Shin'ichiro, 19, 27, 30, 67, 241

Tsuda, Nobuko, 309-312

Takakuma, Tokusaburo: Ainu Monagatari (Ainu tales), 109

Tsugaru Strait, 34, 67-68. See also Paleolithic land bridges

Tamura, Suzuko, 57-65

Tsunemoto, Teruki, 366-368

Tanimoto, Kazuyuki, 282-285

Tuki (ceremonial cups), 21,77, 178,

Tatar Strait, 47

Whale (humpe), 4 1, 222-223,- Ainu whale songs, 223, 226,killer whale, 41,225(30.5), orca (killer whale), 41,
225(30.5), 226, orca-whale symbols, 3 32(46.12-1 3),
spirit deity, 223, 224-225,- whalebone carvings, 224
Whaling, 222-226

Tokugawa collection, 177-178

Stranded whales, 222, 225,- dance to, 223, 223(30.2), 226

Sunazawa, Bikky (Hisano): activist and artist, 25, 1 10,
110, 113, 117, 341, 341-349, 346(47.23),- Ekashi (Bear
and Hunter), 342(47.1 6),- Gozen sanji nogantju (Toys at
3.00 AM.), 345(47.22), 347-348,- Juka (Wooden Flower),
344(47.9), 344-345,- Kami no shita (Tongue of God),
343(47.1 8), 344,- Kaze ni kiku (Listening to the Wind),
346(47.24), 347,- Ki-men (Wooden Masks), 25,
341 (47.1 5a, b), 343, Nitne-kamuy (Evil God),
348(47.27),-Totem poles, 342(47.17), 344(47.20);
Yottsu no kaze (Four Winds), 346, 347(47.25)

Watanabe, Hitoshi, 21,27, 30, 118, 198-201

Trickster (in myths), 279

Y
Yada, Saburo, Life of the Shiraoi Ainu (film), 189
Yae, Seijiro, 374
Yamada, Hidezo, linguistic studies, 60-61
Yamaura, Kiyoshi, 39-46
Yamoto people, 74
Yayoi culture, 1 7(1.1 7), 42-44
Yezo people. See Ezo, Hokkaido
Yoneda, Hideki, The Nibutani Amu Culture Museum, 377-378
Yukar (epic stories), 21, 24, 248, 278, 278-281,280, animals

in, 276—277, kamuy-yukar 274, 276—277, 283, oina, 274,
studies and collections of, 27, 59. See also Myth(s)
Yuki, Shoji, 113

182,328(46.3,

46.5), 329-330

Takusa (grass or bamboo for burning), 248

Turep (lily root), 203(28.4), 204, 238(32.9-10)

Tattoos, women's, 292, 294, 325, 326(45.32-33),-

Tusu/tusu aynu (holy man), 264-265

z
Zoku-Jomon. See Jomon culture

415

r;

V'V ’*>;

»■ -j

-ij
••' T-"V ■!.»'.'

■
V,

•V - •■ ' "••'
/ ’’ '■ i- - ' • '» •-'•.•

■
’.

..

.

..

■ ’’ /*'r'’’,' r ,?'*’•'■

fr' •*' ' )/-. • ••'*’

I "-••rt >.•< Svt( V; >*, >, SSSkV.

.
:..

•

;•■:.^T"^;T

.I;m:

V'V-VV

Si®

■ ■■,

•

1 .M'.,:,.

• ’ ..r,'... ..\ .

•„.

,
'.'•

'■ ••'

.

•>-,“• '

■•' .iWlW

.<•-

'* *ih* V' '••" •••’- '•■••.•'.-

V'&

.(... A, A,V.
."■ ■ •'■•. ’

■ ■'■.••«•»<*

•••,.■• i) ■•••,'■» •

•

■' -v

•<•:•■'-v‘vfty'V- fofa’itywM

C ..V-V;
M ‘ (Vi wiw t-'VWii*®

• * ; • -V -r- • • iV,• ’ M'lfv^:??^r.'•. ?• 'w"vvy.^W'W,;•*■>•
'"*• *r *v
-•l*f*Y'.*• •• Vi*'iljt%*\
•/• * ’••-;'/■'•• ■***$.<,■•■
Wfyf*: - V vViVr-V^V'
' * • •'■•••.v./f.*.:••;.-*» .-‘-v* ,
'■
\
'
. V,V"- ; ^'viw -y '
■'

‘ 'Av

.

J

•*:* '’’*»•••• ••/’?.•

. *••'••/..

iftlWl' *<V

V» I »•) WJHf'v-A**

'

*!*•* -

:

^

•’/* T»Wwy*H|^v

y. ►.... .*.•• v, •• mU ♦<», ,V" Wf(.' •-

- .•., .;-V- > ;■ •;•-• vv
■ '■
1 ■

r -*t* • ~

,»
‘

^

.

-V. 'r-

V'.' -V rf;#’:%%*
PW1 •tAflP'fll v ^

ii^S
'."v;>' i'>i
1

mmiWm

. •/ yu .
'

|*TO .•V;%-.V-y-V* |'».<‘W.

wtnSSft v! BK)| •
< ••’ ■;'

u K- ;

‘

Vi*?

•jKVJ swale* w
.'.'ii..«

fV

■■ i ;

- k.; -|| -.

iV rs:
BAHnP
k,i'N'( -/ •#!i

,

•:!.•

v

Hni u.-Vff'r^ •<■

lii. "j

:=''WJ ..

.Viy'^.i'.V-'.riVV

:yy.tVj',

R'ftitesW' af

•js3'.ms.
'•
'1

.

...

:Vv-'

-r>ifHt.'wVtfv «»*->• V<‘<!

■ -yr^grri. ■^'v*v<.>^/v

• ■, - •1 ••'■

■.fl v v ?;.vVV. l&ysvs; • fei^.ViV.tvVvV-VVviv

... I■' ■ \::,y,V '.
.

■

.

."■■

;•

V ' • f
■.. ■;

V'.^-

.' '! "•
'•
.•.,•>■'•■•■•■■■.■!-■•••-..-!> ’>

•»•".'}>!. .V'.

.. ,vvf' *
''!■ 'VrvVr-.,r.£,#^‘‘r'vr**‘^'v?w.^.v^...
•■,■'■‘•"VV,‘ '•
‘ivy
v:
vv
; ..,V ., ....JM •• y-•■>■■•.-,,v,'K,WA..'.-.■-....•

:■ViS^sfesSsss^^KsM

&£IS;

■'.

I T.‘ ' V

' ..f !.:>■ ^

V»i

-• •

sam:®

*A

'i
*

,».*w*• :'..n.N..«vv-;/:w,^v.-AX-., ,-iV

'll-

v

-VT' - •

<

‘ *rHT

<-r-'iV's . N<<W‘V' 4<f -Vh,.-/*- 1 '••» ‘i-v- * '» ^

±Mm«"'■ ''

"'
• -

.*W.

y< ff. v -y-..'

. '/.»’-•■ >y MVtiJW' 'Kw
»^<y» -•

1

• • , VJk.

KyV'-V/ .<> ' •-; A^Jj4';.-i' fv-vV.
• Ayf.fcfe'lV* . '-^1 : ** • *V)WiyiV' ' *;V«

..

Kf

S

■•;

• ‘ \ ’;.

1*V** r-‘*

' -MV- r>... ••>•"». VK ■Sir- \

-v

■•

<r V'--'•■>■■ •

■■ •■"‘ .**’■)■ •'•; /* *

■.

■ :•;

1

4

y ;•. ^K',i • , ■ ■

•v';.,iV - .t.-v

S

',s-V-

’’'V ■■'r' ''-'

•-f

■’

iw;'

Vo «•'■ 1

4

v\jV.,v;

••' / • '*

••

• : '• :ii •

' ,r < ^'. >
,

i'.I'M
..." .... ;, )

'

-...vw v-■.

,

,

■
'
...

....

■

;

• •■ '■-( ....

.

.•

*. V •

■•: .'• ... Hl/<\ : ; •'•
i- • ••
,
• K •, f.v, i' v. y '•,•• /'•
'• ■: V
■' •■;•:•.• ••
,v:

•>v

■•. ;-.*i.. v -{, c. .-'••.♦■*:» >

!

. v M.l

• ••* ■

. vr • nvi^Vt
■-

.y- .

■■:

■

.
'

■■■■,

■

'
.

■

'

i-'.'
i1./

' 1

t.

' >: •'• ■■

v-i

^

•. W.iK’.Vdw.

• ■ • . ' } . •'

.->• ’l

; ,»t' v.»•

■J.

.....
■

4,»fl
<:u. .!/•'•» ;

•

4'.-.
A':*. >K\

r«w V<M#yr/.y * '
y

'

|Vvh-

v-r’ •.,»

’

' ' '

*'r,

••

••• n ’
•

x:Sw! '' *'

>#v?

1

■' - V’’ ’•;

,.1

\j ; .yjvy.M

l

’■

i*> * • > ' v>, '.4 A

why
';fU'

S

.

....

..

...."...

,...i’1 ■

' »*,•»* •?•'■■•■’'
’< •

-*b.u7'*' 7}.;

),'l‘ •

-.,:... ,*,*/«•> fV V

•• ■'

.• -. .* • < •*»• •v:-1'
VA

^

• 1

■

.

-nh ■ «>"i! ■

•* .'t. ,/ -r\'

• *tr-"

Vr;

.

-4

•., v-v

■Wit

‘ «^;V ■

( '•

- • .- ■• • • • •

'« ... •••» ‘M

|1T/'V.f’'rV '-Vr'-rt/ir^-' V*c'-‘: /1 v‘/, tv , ^
W

vV

. V, . •»

,

*<

y-'

X'r'i>’V< .•;• •••••- . >, -- i1-;.

•{

aiwpra

',r

t

,

M

{ * Vi'fef i.vi ■

■-tuv.

V.s^.4

Minify »■-•> ’A \ :»•'•'

ri*r . :■ .'■'/ ■■ ■•.'•

f.Ar-. r V

•' V..; 'I'.'-- v

'.if- *.-, t-' '

*;Wt"
imnNWM

•7J

:

I ft:

